A structure-based approach for colon gland segmentation in
digital pathology
Bassem Ben cheikh a, Philippe Bertheau b, and Daniel Racoceanu a
aSorbonne Universit´ es, UPMC Univ Paris 06, CNRS, INSERM, Biomedical Imaging
Laboratory (LIB), Paris, France
bUniversity Paris Diderot USPC, APHP, Saint-Louis Hospital, Department of Pathology,
Paris, France
ABSTRACT
The morphology of intestinal glands is an important and signiﬁcant indicator of the level of the severity of
an inﬂammatory bowel disease, and has also been used routinely by pathologists to evaluate the malignancy
and the prognosis of colorectal cancers such as adenocarcinomas. The extraction of meaningful information
describing the morphology of glands relies on an accurate segmentation method. In this work, we propose a novel
technique based on mathematical morphology that characterizes the spatial positioning of nuclei for intestinal
gland segmentation in histopathological images. According to their appearance, glands can be divided into two
types: hallow glands and solid glands. Hallow glands are composed of lumen and/or goblet cells cytoplasm, or
ﬁlled with abscess in some advanced stages of the disease, while solid glands are composed of bunches of cells
clustered together and can also be ﬁlled with necrotic debris. Given this scheme, an eﬃcient characterization of
the spatial distribution of cells is suﬃcient to carry out the segmentation. In this approach, hallow glands are
ﬁrst identiﬁed as regions empty of nuclei and surrounded by thick layers of epithelial cells, then solid glands are
identiﬁed by detecting regions crowded of people. First, cell nuclei are identiﬁed by color classiﬁcation. Then,
morphological maps are generated by the mean of advanced morphological operators applied to nuclei objects in
order to interpret their spatial distribution and properties to identify candidates for glands central-regions and
epithelial layers, that are combined to extract the glandular structures.
Keywords: Gland segmentation, spatial analysis, mathematical morphology, digital pathology
1. INTRODUCTION
The segmentation of cellular and tissue structures in digital pathology is a very challenging task due to the
wide variation in tissue preparation and histological staining. Furthermore, the great variation of glandular
morphology in diﬀerent stages of the disease makes gland segmentation a harder problem. Most of the existing
methods focus on gland segmentation in healthy or benign samples, and quite often, they are adapted to one
speciﬁc stain as they use texture and color information which can be diﬀerent from one staining method to
another. In [1], the biopsy image pixels are classiﬁed to diﬀerent tissue structures (lumen, stroma, nuclei) using
random forest classiﬁer trained with more than 250 color-based features. Then in order to delineate the gland
boundary, active contour is applied for every lumen candidate detected using the pixel-level classiﬁcation. In [2],
texture and color features were calculated for each superpixel segmented by SLIC method [3], and a random forest
classiﬁer was trained based on the extracted features to recognize superpixels belonging to glandular structures
and non-glandular structures. Finally, a probability map is generated in the classiﬁcation process. The same
authors proposed, later, a stochastic polygon model [4] that treats each glandular structure obtained from the
probability map as a polygon made of a random number of vertices associated to the approximate locations
of epithelial nuclei to deﬁne a prior for spatial connectivity and arrangement of neighboring epithelial nuclei.
In [5], the tissue image pixels are ﬁrst quantized into three clusters using k-means algorithm. Then, nodes are
associated to lumen and nuclei using circle-ﬁt algorithm [6], and a graph is reconstructed based on neighboring
properties. Local-geometric features are extracted for each node in order to be classiﬁed as belonging to a gland
or non-gland object using k-means algorithm. Finally, graph-based region growing technique was adopted to
deﬁne the gland boundary. In this work, we present a structure-based approach where we use exclusively nuclei
spatial positioning to accomplish the gland segmentation, which oﬀers scalability and ﬂexibility enabling the

approach to work on diﬀerent stains when all cell nuclei are highlighted. However, the approach was tested on
H&E healthy and benign colon tissue images, where nuclei objects are ﬁrst extracted by color classiﬁcation after
stain normalization. In this study, we consider the segmentation of intestinal glands in two diﬀerent appearances,
linked to the cut section. In fact, depending on the cutting angle, i.e. oblique, traversal or longitudinal, and
the cutting position, i.e. top, middle or bottom, the gland may appear diﬀerent. Therefore, we divide glands
into two types according to their appearance in the cutting plan: hallow glands and solid glands. Hallow glands
are composed of lumen and/or goblet cells cytoplasm, or ﬁlled with abscess in some advanced stages of the
disease. While solid glands are composed of bunches of cells clustered together. A hallow gland central-region
is determined from a density map that describes the spatial distribution of nuclei objects and combined later
with its corresponding epithelial layers to delineate the glandular structure, while a solid gland is identiﬁed as
a cluster of nuclei objects. The framework for gland segmentation is detailed in section 2. Segmentation results
and comparison with other algorithm in the literature are given in section 3. Finally, a conclusion presents our
main contributions and suggest the further works.
2. METHOD
2.1 Nuclei objects identiﬁcation
2.1.1 Color normalization
Due to the great variation in tissue preparation protocols, stain relativities and scanner characteristics, stain
normalization in histopathology images is an essential phase to ensure an eﬃcient analysis and strong stability of
the algorithm. Therefore, we ﬁrst apply the normalization technique proposed by Reinhard & al [7] that matches
the mean and the standard deviation of each channel of an over/under stained tissue image to that of a target
image by means of a set of linear transforms in the Lab color space. Figure 5.a shows the target image chosen.
2.1.2 Background removal
Since there are some images where a large portion of the background is white, we eliminate those regions by ﬁrst
creating a binary mask such that oﬀ pixels correspond to whitish color, i. e. (IR > 0)&(IG > 0)&(IB > 0), where
IR, IG and IB are the red, green and blue channels of the original image respectively. Then, a morphological
closing with disk of radius r0 = 40 pixels is applied to delineate the tissue portion.
2.1.3 Nuclei identiﬁcation
The main information used in this method is based on the topographical histology of the glandular tissue and,
thus, the spatial arrangement of nuclei. In a typical image of an H&E colorectal tissue, there are mainly three
colors. Nuclei would show blue-purple color. Stroma and cytoplasm have varying degrees of pink. Lumen,
background and goblet cells cytoplasm would have whitish color. Hence, the pixels of an image are quantized
into three clusters withk−means algorithm according to their values in the Lab color space and pixels belonging
to the bluest cluster are associated to nuclei objects (see ﬁgure 1.b). At the chosen resolutions, i.e. 0 .62µm/pixel
and 0.94µm/pixel, a binary connected component can be associated to two or more neighbor nuclei when they
are very close, thus, most thick and solid binary objects derive from epithelial layers. It should be noted that red
blood cells and other artifacts can be associated to the same cluster as nuclei during the classiﬁcation, but they
are soon eliminated by color thresholding, i. e. pixels with great red ratio are eliminated. As shown in ﬁgure
1.b, a hallow gland can be recognized by an empty surface, characterizing its inner area, surrounded by solid
connected components connected components, derived from epithelial layers, while a solid gland can be identiﬁed
by a cluster of connected components. In the following, two maps characterizing the spatial distribution of nuclei
objects are generated using the corresponding binary image denoted IN.
2.2 Gland seed determination
As the majority gland segmentation methods, we address the problem by ﬁrst determining its central region. In
this approach, the central region of a hallow gland is deﬁned as a region empty of nuclei, based on their spatial
distribution. In order to characterize the spatial distribution of nuclei objects, a map that gives in each pixel the
information about the local density of nuclei objects is calculated by the mean of accumulated morphological

Figure 1. (a) Example of intestinal glands at 0 .62µm/pixel. Green: hallow glands. Red: solid glands. (b) Nuclei objects
image: IN.
closing operations applied to the binary image IN with disks of diﬀerent radii, toward a multiscale adaptation
to ensure the detection of glandular regions of diﬀerent sizes (see ﬁgure 2.a):
Dmap = 1
RD
RD∑
r=1
Cr(IN) (1)
Where Cr is the morphological closing with a disk of radius r and RD is the maximal disk radius. Pixels that
are inside a hallow gland surface have low density values comparing to pixels of the connective tissue. While
pixels corresponding to epithelial layers have high values (see ﬁgure 2.a). Thus, the pixels of the density map
are classiﬁed by k-means algorithm to three clusters according to their local density values and the cluster with
the lowest mean value is associated to central-region candidates (CRCs) for hallow glands, see ﬁgure 2.b. Pixels
of the cluster with the highest mean value and the second mean value are associated respectively to epithelial
layers and connective tissue. At this step, 83% of CRC pixels are inside glandular regions of hallow glands, which
gives promising detection results of hallow glands in this approach. The false positive components are eliminated
during the next steps, when investigating their surrounding areas, i.e. the presence or not of an epithelia layer.
Figure 2. (a) Density map Dmap. (b) Gland central-region candidate: each connected component is labeled in a diﬀerent
color
2.3 Epithelial layer determination
2.3.1 Solidity map
Epithelial layers are most often characterized by thick and solid objects comparing to connective tissue-nuclei ob-
jects, as epithelial cells are bonded to each other. Therefore, a map describing the solidity and the connectedness

of nuclei objects is calculated using this formula:
Smap = 1
RS ×smax
RS∑
r=1
smax∑
s=1
Js(ρIN (Or(IN))) (2)
whereOr(X) is the morphological opening of imageX with a disk of radiusr,ρY (X) is the geodesic reconstruction
of the image X under the image Y , and Js is a removal operator of connected components with size smaller
than s. RS is the maximal radius and smax the maximal connected component size. These parameters depend
on the image resolution and are discussed in section 3. The use of these operations at diﬀerent levels, i.e. with
diﬀerent values of r and s, agrees the variation in size of epithelial layers. The obtained map shows epithelial
layers objects with higher solidity values than connective tissue nuclei objects (see ﬁg 3.a).
2.3.2 Girth map
In order to determine gland CRC that are in fact surrounded by solid connected components, we introduce
another characteristic map to be combined with the solidity map and identify the chain of epithelial cells objects
that surrounds the gland. Therefore, we generate a map that describes how nuclei objects are surrounding a
CRC extracted from the density map during the ﬁrst step. This map is given by:
Gmap = 1
RG
RG∑
r=1
ρIN (δr(L)) ×IN) (3)
whereL is the CRCs mask obtained from the classiﬁcation of Dmap (see ﬁg 2.b), δr is the morphological dilation
with a disk of radius r, ”×” is the Hadamard product of two matrices and RG is the maximal disk radius. The
girth map shows higher values for epithelial layers objects of hallow glands than other nuclei objects, including
those of solid glands (see ﬁg 3.b).
Figure 3. (a) Solidity map. (b) Girth map.
The combination of the solidity map with the girth map allow us to identify the chain of epithelial cell objects
that are, in reality, surrounding a gland. Hence, the connected components of ( Smap +Gmap)/2 are classiﬁed
to two clusters using k-means algorithm and the cluster with the highest mean value is associated to epithelial
layers (see ﬁg 4.a).
2.4 Gland boundary delineation and false positive elimination
2.4.1 Hallow gland
After identifying glandular region candidates, most of existing methods use sophisticated techniques to delineate
the glandular structure, as active contour or region growing, which implies long and hard process of adaptation
due to the great variation in shape of glandular structures and image illumination and contrast. In this ap-
proach, we use the epithelial layer itself to delimit the glandular structure, which gives more precise delineation.
Therefore, all connected components of an epithelial layer, identiﬁed during the previous step, are labeled with

the same label as their corresponding CRC by morphological reconstruction: ρ(L+E)(δrH(L) ×E), whereE is the
binary mask of epithelial layers, L is the labeled mask of CRCs and rH = RG
4 . Finally, morphological operations
as closing, opening and ﬂood-ﬁll are applied to ﬁll the gap between the epithelial layer and the central region
and to reﬁne the segmented object (see ﬁg 2.d).
2.4.2 Solid gland
Solid glands are characterized by high solidity values and low girth values, as they are packed objects not
surrounding any empty region. Therefore, we identify solid glands by excluding from the solidity map epithelial
layer objects that were segmented during the previous step, i.e. nuclei objects associated to hallow glands and
removing nuclei objects smaller than 3000µm2. Then, morphological closing followed by opening are also applied
to improve the boundaries of the segmented structures.
Figure 4. (a) Epithelial layers identiﬁcation after k-means classiﬁcation of Smap+Gmap
2 . Nuclei objects retained after
the classiﬁcation are overlayed in red. (b) Gland segmentation of the tissue image in ﬁg 1.a. Each segmented gland is
overlayed in a diﬀerent color
3. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
3.1 Datasets
To assess the eﬀectiveness of our approach, the experiment was conducted on two diﬀerent datasets of healthy
and benign H&E tissue sections. The ﬁrst dataset, provided by Warwick university hospitals in the context of
Gland Segmentation Challenge1 , consists of 17 images extracted at 0.62µm/pixel resolution and containing 255
glands in total. The second dataset is provided by APHP-hospitals and consists of 64 images captured at a
resolution of 0.94µm/pixel and containing 1824 in total.
3.2 Experimental settings
The diﬀerent parameters of the algorithm are set depending on the image resolution. Therefore, their values are
given in micrometer rather than number of pixels. The maximal radii of the density map, the solidity map and
the girth map are set to RD = 24µm, RG = 2.4µm and RS = 30µm respectively, and the maximal size of a
removed connected components during the solidity map generation is smax = 120µm2.
3.3 Experimental results
To quantitatively evaluate our segmentation results, the true positive (TP), false positive (FP), , and false
negative (FN) pixels are calculated. We use two quantitative criterions for the evaluation of our segmentation
algorithm on the two diﬀerent datasets: the F1-score for detection accuracy with a minimum overlap of 50%
with the ground truth, and the object-level Dice index for segmentation accuracy. Both indices produce scores
ranging between 0 and 1, where 1 indicates perfect segmentation.
1http://www.warwick.ac.uk/bialab/GlaScontest.

Dataset F1-Score Object-Dice
APHP-Sorbonne Univ 0.8239 0.8841
Warwick University 0.8663 0.9113
Total 0.8328 0.8898
Table 1. Quantitative evaluation of the sementation methods.
Table 2 shows the comparative quantitative performance of the proposed approach against 3 other methods
in the literature; active contour [1], superpixel-based approach [2] and object-graphs [5], based on 3 quantitative
measures: the precision also referred to as positive predictive value PPV = T P
T P +F P , the sensitivity referred to
as the true positive rate TPR = T P
T P +F N , and the accuracy ACC = T P
T P +F P +F N .
Method PPV TPR ACC
active contour [1] 0.88 0.78 0.70
superpixel-based approach [2] n.a. n.a. 0.72
object-graphs [5] 0.91 0.85 0.78
Mathematical Morphology 0.86 0.84 0.74
Table 2. Quantitative evaluation of the sementation methods.
Figure 5. Examples of segmentation results: (a) image from Warwick university dataset. (b) image from APHP-Sorbonne
university dataset.
4. CONCLUSION
This work presents a new gland segmentation method based on advanced morphological operators applied to seg-
mented nuclei objects in order to interpret their spatial distribution to identify glandular regions. The method
was tested on two diﬀerent datasets of H&E colon sections and it gives promising preliminary segmentation
results. One of the main advantages of this approach is its scalability to diﬀerent histology stains like im-
munohistochemistry and ﬂuorescence and diﬀerent types of glandular tissues like prostatic glands and mammary
glands, as it is based mainly on the spatial arrangements of cells rather than texture and color information. In
our future works, we will focus on the extraction of numeric parameters from the diﬀerent maps generated in
this study and we will provide new topological properties based on graph theory and sparse sets mathemati-
cal morphology [8] describing the spatial arrangement of nuclei in order to make segmentation on healthy and
cancerous glandular tissues from diﬀerent orgrans and with diﬀerent stains.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This study has been done with the support of the FUI project FlexMIm: Collaborative Digital Pathology -
Funded by the Consolidated Interministerial Fund (FUI - Fonds Unitaires Intermin-istriels) French Ministry of
Industry (MINEFE)
http://www.systematic-paris-region.org/en/projets/ﬂexmim

REFERENCES
[1] Cohen A, Rivlin E, Shimshoni I, Sabo E, ”Memory based active contour algorithm using pixel-level classiﬁed
images for colon crypt segmentation”, Computerized Medical Imaging and Graphics, 2015.
[2] Korsuk Sirinukunwattana, David R. Snead and Nasir M. Rajpoot, ”A novel texture descriptor for detection of
glandular structures in colon histology images”, Proc. SPIE 9420, Medical Imaging 2015: Digital Pathology,
94200S (March 19, 2015); doi:10.1117/12.2082010.
[3] R. Achanta, A. Shaji, K. Smith, A. Lucchi, P. Fua, and S. Susstrunk, ”SLIC superpixels com- pared to
state-of-the-art superpixel methods”, Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence, IEEE Transactions on, vol.
34, no. 11, pp. 22742282, 2012.
[4] K. Sirinukunwattana, D.R.J. Snead, N.M. Rajpoot, ”A Stochastic Polygons Model for Glandular Struc-
tures in Colon Histology Images”, in IEEE Transactions on Medical Imaging, 2015 (in press) doi:
10.1109/TMI.2015.2433900.
[5] C. Gunduz-Demir, M. Kandemir, A. Tosun, and C. Sokmensuer, ”Automatic segmentation of colon glands
using object-graphs”, Medical Image Analysis, vol. 14, no. 1, pp. 112, 2010.
[6] Akif Burak Tosuna, Melih Kandemir a, Cenk Sokmensuerb, Cigdem Gunduz-Demir, ”Object-oriented texture
analysis for the unsupervised segmentation of biopsy images for cancer detection”, Pattern Recognition, 2009.
[7] Erik Reinhard, Michael Ashikhmin, Bruce Gooch, and Peter Shirley, ”Color transfer between images”, Com-
puter Graphics and Applications IEEE, 2001.
[8] Nicolas Lomenie and Daniel Racoceanu, ”Point Set Morphological Filtering and Semantic Spatial Conﬁgu-
ration Modeling: application to microscopic image and bio-structure analysis”, Pattern Recognition 2012.