/gid00030/gid00035/gid00032/gid00030/gid00038/gid00001/gid00033/gid00042/gid00045/gid00001
/gid00048/gid00043/gid00031/gid00028/gid00047/gid00032/gid00046
Citation: Davri, A.; Birbas, E.;
Kanavos, T.; Ntritsos, G.; Giannakeas,
N.; Tzallas, A.T.; Batistatou, A. Deep
Learning on Histopathological
Images for Colorectal Cancer
Diagnosis: A Systematic Review.
Diagnostics 2022, 12, 837.
https://doi.org/10.3390/
diagnostics12040837
Academic Editor: Catarina Eloy
Received: 28 February 2022
Accepted: 25 March 2022
Published: 29 March 2022
Publisher’s Note:MDPI stays neutral
with regard to jurisdictional claims in
published maps and institutional afﬁl-
iations.
Copyright: © 2022 by the authors.
Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.
This article is an open access article
distributed under the terms and
conditions of the Creative Commons
Attribution (CC BY) license (https://
creativecommons.org/licenses/by/
4.0/).
diagnostics 
Systematic Review
Deep Learning on Histopathological Images for Colorectal
Cancer Diagnosis: A Systematic Review
Athena Davri 1,*
 , Effrosyni Birbas 2
 , Theoﬁlos Kanavos 2
 , Georgios Ntritsos 3,4 , Nikolaos Giannakeas 4,*
 ,
Alexandros T. Tzallas 4
 and Anna Batistatou 1
1 Department of Pathology, Faculty of Medicine, School of Health Sciences, University of Ioannina,
45500 Ioannina, Greece; abatista@uoi.gr
2 Faculty of Medicine, School of Health Sciences, University of Ioannina, 45500 Ioannina, Greece;
faybirbas@gmail.com (E.B.); kanavosus@gmail.com (T.K.)
3 Department of Hygiene and Epidemiology, Faculty of Medicine, University of Ioannina,
45500 Ioannina, Greece; gntritsos@uoi.gr
4 Department of Informatics and Telecommunications, University of Ioannina, 47100 Arta, Greece;
tzallas@uoi.gr
* Correspondence: athinaadav@outlook.com (A.D.); giannakeas@uoi.gr (N.G.)
Abstract: Colorectal cancer (CRC) is the second most common cancer in women and the third
most common in men, with an increasing incidence. Pathology diagnosis complemented with
prognostic and predictive biomarker information is the ﬁrst step for personalized treatment. The
increased diagnostic load in the pathology laboratory, combined with the reported intra- and inter-
variability in the assessment of biomarkers, has prompted the quest for reliable machine-based
methods to be incorporated into the routine practice. Recently, Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AI) has made
signiﬁcant progress in the medical ﬁeld, showing potential for clinical applications. Herein, we aim to
systematically review the current research on AI in CRC image analysis. In histopathology, algorithms
based on Deep Learning (DL) have the potential to assist in diagnosis, predict clinically relevant
molecular phenotypes and microsatellite instability, identify histological features related to prognosis
and correlated to metastasis, and assess the speciﬁc components of the tumor microenvironment.
Keywords: colorectal cancer; CRC; histopathology; microscopy images; deep learning; DL; convolutional
neural networks; CNN
1. Introduction
Colorectal cancer (CRC) is one of the most common types of gastrointestinal cancer, the
second most common cancer in women and the third in men [1]. Despite existing variations,
such as geographical distribution, age and gender differences, the CRC incidence, overall,
is estimated to increase by 80% in the year 2035, worldwide [2]. This rising incidence of
CRC is mainly due to changes in lifestyle, particularly dietary patterns [3]. Most CRCs are
sporadic (70–80%), while approximately one third have a hereditary component [4]. Within
the term CRC, a wide range of carcinoma subtypes is included, characterized by different
morphological features and molecular alterations.
The cornerstone of CRC diagnosis is the pathologic examination (biopsy or surgical
excision) [5]. With the advent of screening methods, many precursor lesions are also
detected and biopsied. Consequently, a wide range of pre-malignant lesions have been
identiﬁed, and occasionally, a differential diagnosis between pre-malignant and malignant
lesions is quite challenging [6]. The histopathological examination of the tissue remains
the “gold standard” for diagnosis, with the ﬁrst step being the optimal preparation of the
histological section, stained with Hematoxylin and Eosin (H&E) [7]. Further examination
with special in situ methods, such as immunohistochemistry (IHC) and in situ hybridization
(ISH), and other molecular techniques follows [8]. There are published guidelines for pre-
analytical, analytical and post-analytical procedures in a pathology laboratory [ 9]. As
Diagnostics 2022, 12, 837. https://doi.org/10.3390/diagnostics12040837 https://www.mdpi.com/journal/diagnostics

Diagnostics 2022, 12, 837 2 of 32
expected, due to the high incidence of CRC, the diagnostic load in a routine pathology
laboratory is very heavy and the introduction of an ever-growing list of morpho-molecular
features to be examined and noted has made the diagnosis a time-consuming process [10].
All these factors, in combination with the shortage of pathologists worldwide, have led to
delays in diagnosis, with consequences to the optimal healthcare of the patient.
It has been shown that pathologists make a diagnosis based mainly on image-based
pattern recognition [6]. With this strategy, architectural and cellular characteristics conform
to already known features of a disease [11]. In several instances, an accurate diagnosis or
estimation of prognostic and predictive factors is subject to personal interpretations, leading
to inter- and intra-observer variability [12,13]. In a continuous effort to improve the accuracy
of the pathology diagnosis, combined with the timely delivery of all vital information for
optimal patient treatment, the new and breakthrough technologies can be of great value.
Thus, in the last 5 years, the development of reliable computational approaches, using
machine learning based on pattern recognition, has exponentially increased, as reﬂected in
the plethora of published papers [14,15].
The recent World Health Organization (WHO) classiﬁcation for malignant epithelial
tumors of the colorectum includes four main categories: adenocarcinoma (ADC) not other-
wise speciﬁed (NOS), neuroendocrine tumor NOS, neuroendocrine carcinoma NOS and
mixed neuroendocrine-non-neuroendocrine neoplasm (MiMEN) [16]. Of these, colorectal
ADC is the most common (90%) and, by deﬁnition, it shows glandular and mucinous
differentiation. Colorectal ADC has several histopathological subtypes, with speciﬁc mor-
phologic, clinical, and molecular characteristics, i.e., serrated ADC, adenoma-like ADC,
micropapillary ADC, mucinous ADC, poorly cohesive carcinoma, signet-ring cell carci-
noma, medullary ADC, adenosquamous carcinoma, carcinoma undifferentiated NOS and
carcinoma with sarcomatoid component.
The diagnosis of CRC is only the ﬁrst step for a complete pathology report. Accord-
ing to best-practice guidelines, the speciﬁc histologic subtype, the histologic grade, the
TNM staging system, the lymphovascular and perineural invasion, and the tumor bud-
ding should be reported [9,16]. In recent years, the molecular pathological classiﬁcation
of CRC has been proposed, aiming to compliment the traditional histopathologic classi-
ﬁcation [ 4]. An integrated molecular analysis performed by the Cancer Genome Atlas
Network, has classiﬁed CRC into three groups, including highly mutated tumors (~13%),
ultra-mutated tumors (~3%) and chromosomal instability (CIN) tumors (~84%). In 2015,
an expression-signature-based classiﬁcation was proposed with four consensus molecular
subtype (CMS) groups: CMS1 subtype (MSI-immune, 14%), CMS2 subtype (canonical,
37%), CMS3 subtype (metabolic, 13%) and CMS4 subtype (mesenchymal, 23%). In addi-
tion, molecular alterations are prevalent in CRC, consisting of Chromosomal Instability
(CIN), Microsatellite Instability (MSI) and a CpG Island Methylator phenotype (CIMP).
Defective mismatch repair (MMR) DNA mechanisms lead to increased mutations and,
consequently, to MSI [17,18]. The majority of sporadic CRCs are characterized by CIN
(~84%), and ~13–16% are hypermutated with an MSI status. The immunohistochemical
detection of either an abnormal expression or a loss of expression of the mismatch repair
proteins, MLH1, MSH2, MSH6, and PMS2, is of signiﬁcant diagnostic and prognostic value
in CRC, as well as for the detection of hereditary nonpolyposis colorectal cancer (HNPCC),
also known as Lynch syndrome, which constitutes approximately 2% to 3% of all colorectal
carcinomas [19–21].
Histopathology image generations start with the standard procedure of tissue prepara-
tion. Biopsy or surgical specimens (representative sections) are formalin-ﬁxed and parafﬁn-
embedded. Then, the 4µm tissue sections are prepared and stained with H&E dye [22]. The
images are extracted after a scanning procedure. Several scanning systems can be used
to digitize the whole slide [23], such as the Hamamatsu NanoZoomer series, the Omnyx
scanner, the Zeiss scanners, the Pannoramic 250 Flash II, and the Leica Biosystems Aperio
systems [24]. Most of the above scanners provide two optical magniﬁcations, 20 × and 40×,
however, the user can also digitally undersample the image in different magniﬁcations.

Diagnostics 2022, 12, 837 3 of 32
A scanner needs several minutes for the scanning of the whole slide, while most of the
system can deal with tens or hundreds of slides that are scanned automatically one-by-one.
According to the digitalization, each pixel of a Whole Slide Image (WSI) corresponds to
a physical area of several decades nm 2. For example, in the 40 × magniﬁcation mode, a
Hamamatsu NanoZoomer scanner extracts an image, where the size of each pixel edge cor-
responds to 227 nm [25]. The latter image digitization provides an appropriate resolution
for most of the histological ﬁndings, which presents a physical size of microns [26]. In most
of the cases, the extracting images are storage either in a compressed JPEG-based format
or an uncompressed TIFF format. Figure 1 presents the resolution of a WSI, scanned by a
Hamamatsu NanoZoomer 210.
Diagnostics 2022, 12, x FOR PEER REVIEW 3 of 38 
 
 
Omnyx scanner, the Zeiss scanners, the Pannoramic 250 Flash II, and the Leica Biosystems 
Aperio systems [24]. Most of the above sca nners provide two optical magnifications, 20× 
and 40×, however, the user can also digita lly undersample the image in different magni-
fications. A scanner needs several minutes for the scanning of the whole slide, while most 
of the system can deal with tens or hundreds of slides that are scanned automatically one-
by-one. According to the digitalization, each  pixel of a Whole Slide Image (WSI) corre-
sponds to a physical area of several decades nm 2. For example, in the 40× magnification 
mode, a Hamamatsu NanoZoomer scanner extracts an image, where the size of each pixel 
edge corresponds to 227 nm [25]. The latter im age digitization provides an appropriate 
resolution for most of the histological findings, which presents a physical size of microns 
[26]. In most of the cases, the extracting im ages are storage either in a compressed JPEG-
based format or an uncompressed TIFF format. Figure 1 presents the resolution of a WSI, 
scanned by a Hamamatsu NanoΖoomer 210. 
 
Figure 1. Image generation using a Hamamatsu NanoZoomer whole slide scanner: ( a) histological 
slide 75 mm × 25 mm, (b) Whole Slide Image (WSI), (c) cell level in 40× magnification, (d) pixel level 
in 40× magnification digitizing images 227 nm per pixel. 
Machine learning is a branch of AI which is based on the concept that machines could 
have access to data and be able to learn on their own. AI has a broader scope and involves 
machines that are capable of carrying out tasks requiring intelligence. Machine learning 
techniques focus on the creation of intelligent software using statistical learning methods 
and require access to data for the learning procedure [27]. A branch of machine learning, 
which has drawn a lot of attention over the last few years, is DL. DL involves training 
artificial neural networks (ANNs) with multiple layers of artificial neurons (nodes). Neu-
ral networks are inspired from the human phys iology of the brain, comprising a simpli-
fied artificial model of the human neural network. An ANN is a collection of connected 
artificial neurons. The simplest ANN architecture is the single layer feed forward neural 
network. In these types of networks, the information moves in one direction only, from 
the inputs’ nodes to the hidden layer nodes and then to the output nodes. The success and 
wide acceptance of ANNs relies on their capability to solve complex mathematical prob-
lems, nonlinear or stochastic, by using very simple computational operations. In contrast 
to a conventional algorithm, which needs complex mathematical and algorithmic opera-
tions and could only apply to one problem, an ANN is computationally and algorithmi-
cally very simple and its structure allows it to be applied in a wide range of problems [28]. 
DL has rapidly developed during the last dec ade due to the significant increase in 
processing power and to the fact that, for the first time, artificial models are able to achieve 
Figure 1. Image generation using a Hamamatsu NanoZoomer whole slide scanner: (a) histological
slide 75 mm × 25 mm, (b) Whole Slide Image (WSI), (c) cell level in 40× magniﬁcation, (d) pixel level
in 40× magniﬁcation digitizing images 227 nm per pixel.
Machine learning is a branch of AI which is based on the concept that machines could
have access to data and be able to learn on their own. AI has a broader scope and involves
machines that are capable of carrying out tasks requiring intelligence. Machine learning
techniques focus on the creation of intelligent software using statistical learning methods
and require access to data for the learning procedure [27]. A branch of machine learning,
which has drawn a lot of attention over the last few years, is DL. DL involves training
artiﬁcial neural networks (ANNs) with multiple layers of artiﬁcial neurons (nodes). Neural
networks are inspired from the human physiology of the brain, comprising a simpliﬁed
artiﬁcial model of the human neural network. An ANN is a collection of connected artiﬁcial
neurons. The simplest ANN architecture is the single layer feed forward neural network.
In these types of networks, the information moves in one direction only, from the inputs’
nodes to the hidden layer nodes and then to the output nodes. The success and wide
acceptance of ANNs relies on their capability to solve complex mathematical problems,
nonlinear or stochastic, by using very simple computational operations. In contrast to a
conventional algorithm, which needs complex mathematical and algorithmic operations
and could only apply to one problem, an ANN is computationally and algorithmically very
simple and its structure allows it to be applied in a wide range of problems [28].
DL has rapidly developed during the last decade due to the signiﬁcant increase
in processing power and to the fact that, for the ﬁrst time, artiﬁcial models are able to
achieve more accurate results than humans in classiﬁcation tasks [ 29]. Both DL and
machine learning techniques in general affect our everyday life in various ways. From
the simple-looking face recognition program used in Facebook, to the classiﬁcation of
abnormal/normal human cells in bioinformatics. For image analysis problems, such as the

Diagnostics 2022, 12, 837 4 of 32
histological lesions’ detections, prognosis and diagnosis, DL approaches mainly employ
Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) for segmentation and classiﬁcation, while few
studies employ another DL approach, called Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs), to
improve the training set of images before classiﬁcation.
CNNs have produced high classiﬁcation rates in modern computer vision applications.
The term “convolutional” suggests that a deep neural network applies the mathematical
convolution operation to at least one of its multiple hidden layers. Many CNN model
variations have been implemented in recent years, which are based on a common layer
pattern: (a) 1 input layer, (b) L-1 convolution layers and (c) 1 classiﬁcation layer. The
key feature of a sequential CNN is that it transforms the input data through neurons
that are connected to neurons of the previous convolution layer. Initially, the raw image
is loaded at the input layer, which is usually set to accept a three-dimensional spatial
form of an image ﬁle (width × height × depth), with the depth, in this case, indicating
the RGB (Red, Green, Blue) color channels. More technically, each of the convolution
layers calculates the dot product between the area of the neurons in the input layer and
the weights in a predetermined size of a ﬁltering kernel (e.g., 3 × 3). In this way, local
features can be detected through K declared kernels. As a result, all nodes (neurons)
of each convolution layer calculate their activation value based on only one subset of
spatially adjacent nodes on the ﬁltered feature maps of each previous convolution layer.
The most common deep network architectures, such as AlexNet and GoogleNet, use the
same neuron type at each hidden layer [ 30,31]. These architectures achieve very high
accuracy in classiﬁcation problems, while their training is a computationally intensive and
time-consuming process. Currently, many different architectures, such as VGG, DenseNet,
ResNet, Inception.v3, etc., have been proposed, performing well under different conditions
and problem parameters [31–33].
GANs are also a DL approach applied on digital image analysis [ 34]. GANs are
a smart way to train a model as a supervised learning problem, even if based on their
principles they are unsupervised machine learning procedures. A typical GAN consists of
two sub-models: (a) the generator network, where the training generates new samples with
similar characteristics to the real ones and (b) the discriminator network, which provides a
binary classiﬁcation of the generating samples, discriminating the real (approved) samples
from the fake ones. GANs have been rapidly evolved, especially in image processing and
classiﬁcation, providing a sophisticated approach to simulate images for CNN training,
avoiding overtraining and overﬁtting. It is an alternative method of image augmentation
which extracts simulated images using simple transformations such as rotation, shearing,
stretching, etc.
In this paper, a systematic review for the application of DL in colorectal cancer, using
digital image analysis in histopathological images, is presented. The aim of the manuscript
focuses on the investigation from both medical and technical viewpoints. The innovative
contribution of this systematic review is the combination of the two viewpoints provided,
presenting a more comprehensive analysis of AI-based models in CRC diagnosis. A
deeper understanding on both medical and technical aspects of DL will better reveal the
opportunities of implementing DL-based models in clinical practice, as well as overcome
several challenges occurring for the optimal performance of the algorithms. According to
the PRISMA guidelines [35], an expanded algorithm was used for searching the literature
works. Speciﬁc inclusion and exclusion criteria have been deﬁned to result in the ﬁnal
studies of interest, which have been categorized for both medical and technical points
of views. In the next sections, signiﬁcant backgrounds for both the clinical practice and
the details about DL in image analysis are outlined, the method for the study selection is
analyzed, and results are extensively discussed.

Diagnostics 2022, 12, 837 5 of 32
2. Materials and Methods
2.1. Search Strategy
We systematically searched PubMed from inception to 31 December 2021 for pri-
mary studies developing a DL model for the histopathological interpretation of large
bowel biopsy tissues and CRC. For this purpose, we used the following algorithm: (con-
volutional neural networks OR CNN OR deep learning) AND ((cancer AND (colon OR
colorectal OR intestin* OR bowel)) OR (adenocarcinoma AND (colon OR colorectal OR
intestin* OR bowel)) OR (carcinoma AND (colon OR colorectal OR intestin* OR bowel))
OR (malignan* AND (colon OR colorectal OR intestin* OR bowel))) AND (biop* OR micro-
scop* OR histolog* OR slide* OR eosin OR histopatholog*). The search was conducted on
14 January 2022.
2.2. Study Eligibility Criteria
The study was conducted according to the PRISMA guidelines and registered to PROS-
PERO 2020. Eligible articles were considered based on the following criteria. We included
studies presenting the development of at least one DL model for the histopathological
assessment of large bowel slides and CRC. Eligible applications of the DL models included
diagnosis, tumor tissue classiﬁcation, tumor microenvironment analysis, prognosis, sur-
vival and metastasis risk evaluation, tumor mutational burden characterization and, ﬁnally,
microsatellite instability detection. We excluded articles that presented in vitro models,
used endoscopic or radiological images instead of histological sections, and involved non-
photonic microscopy. Furthermore, eligible articles should report original studies and not
reviews/meta-analyses, concern humans and be written in English. Additionally, articles
referring to organs other than the large bowel and benign entities were deemed ineligible.
2.3. Study Selection
All citations collected by the previously mentioned methodology were independently
screened by four researchers, who were properly trained before the process started, using
the online software Rayyan. Three of the researchers were scientiﬁcally capable of evalu-
ating the medical aspect of the query and one of them was a CNN expert, able to assess
the technical part. During the screening period, the researchers would meet regularly to
discuss disagreements and continue training. Conﬂicts were resolved by consensus. The
full texts of potentially eligible articles were later retrieved for further evaluation.
2.4. Data Extraction
To facilitate the data extraction process, we specially designed a spreadsheet form,
which all researchers could access to import data from all the eligible articles. From each
paper, we extracted information on ﬁrst author, year and journal of publication, PubMed
ID, title, aim of medical research, technical method, classiﬁcation details, dataset and
performance metrics.
3. Results
Our systematic search returned 166 articles, 92 of which were selected for full-text
screening. Finally, 82 articles were considered eligible for our systematic review according
to our criteria of eligibility. A detailed description of the study selection process can be
found in the PRISMA ﬂow-chart presented in Figure 2. The selected works are presented
both through the medical and technical point of view (Figure 3), while Table 1 includes
the characteristics of each study, regarding the medical scope, the technical approach, the
employed datasets, and ﬁnally, the performance of the proposed method.
3.1. Medical Viewpoint
According to the medical scope of view, there are ﬁve categories: (a) studies for
diagnostic purposes, (b) the classiﬁcation of the tumor tissue, (c) the investigation of the

Diagnostics 2022, 12, 837 6 of 32
tumor microenvironment, (d) the role of histological features to prognosis, metastasis and
survival, and ﬁnally, (e) the identiﬁcation of microsatellite instability.
Diagnostics 2022, 12, x FOR PEER REVIEW 6 of 38 
 
 
 
Figure 2. Systematic review flow-chart illustrating systematic search and screening strategy, includ-
ing number of studies meeting eligibility criteria and number of excluded studies. Last search car-
ried out on 14 January 2022. 
 
Figure 3. Tree diagram for the categorization of the studies. 
3.1. Medical Viewpoint 
According to the medical scope of view, ther e are five categories: (a) studies for di-
agnostic purposes, (b) the clas sification of the tumor tissue, (c) the investigation of the 
tumor microenvironment, (d) the role of histological features to prognosis, metastasis and 
survival, and finally, (e) the identification of microsatellite instability. 
3.1.1. Diagnosis 
DL techniques can assist in the process of  pathology diagnosis [14]. The algorithms 
perform a binary classification, for instance, cancer/non-cancer, colon benign tissue/colon 
ADC. 
The classification of the tumor regions in WSIs by AI-based models could assist in 
the time-consuming process of a microscopical examination. The suggested models in the 
study by Gupta et al. classified normal and abnormal tissue in CRC slides and localized 
the cancer regions with good performance metrics [36]. Zhou et al. used global labels for 
tumor classification and localization without the need for annotated images [37]. In the 
Records identified from MEDLINE 
database (n = 166)
Records screened (n = 166)
Reports assessed for eligibility           
(n = 92)
Studies included in systematic review     
(n = 82)
• Endoscopic images (n = 21)
• Review article (n = 20)
• No clinical endpoint of interest (n = 11)
• Not colon (n = 5)
• Medical imaging (n = 4)
• Meta-analysis (n = 3)
• Non-photonic microscopy (n = 3)
• Benign entities (n = 3)
• Not imaging deep learning (n = 2)
• In vitro (n = 1)
• Not human (n = 1)
Records excluded (n = 74)
• Not colon (n = 4)
• Medical imaging (n = 1)
• No clinical endpoint of interest (n = 1)
• Not English (n = 1)
• Not imaging deep learning (n = 1)
• Non-photonic microscopy (n = 1)
• Benign entities (n = 1)
Reports excluded (n = 10)
Identification of studies via MEDLINE database
IdentificationScreeningIncluded
Deep Learning
Convolutional 
Neural Networks 
(CNNs)
Generative 
Adversarial 
Networks (GANs)
CRC
Custom 
Architectures
Pretrained 
Architectures & 
Transfer Learning
Microsatellite 
Instability
Tumor Tissue 
Classification
Histological 
Features
Medical Viewpoint Technical Viewpoint
Cancer/not Cancer
Benign/Colon ADC
Benign/malignant
Tumor 
microenvironment
Grade
Multi-class
Glands
Diagnosis
Nuclei
Biomarkers (IHC)
Novel 
Architectures
from scratch layer 
building 
VGG/Inception.v3/
ResNet/U-Net etc.
CGAN/SAFRON
Popular CNN 
Modifications
Method 
Combinations
Ensemble 
Methods
Figure 2. Systematic review ﬂow-chart illustrating systematic search and screening strategy, including
number of studies meeting eligibility criteria and number of excluded studies. Last search carried
out on 14 January 2022.
Diagnostics 2022, 12, x FOR PEER REVIEW 6 of 38 
 
 
 
Figure 2. Systematic review flow-chart illustrating systematic search and screening strategy, includ-
ing number of studies meeting eligibility criteria and number of excluded studies. Last search car-
ried out on 14 January 2022. 
 
Figure 3. Tree diagram for the categorization of the studies. 
3.1. Medical Viewpoint 
According to the medical scope of view, ther e are five categories: (a) studies for di-
agnostic purposes, (b) the clas sification of the tumor tissue, (c) the investigation of the 
tumor microenvironment, (d) the role of histological features to prognosis, metastasis and 
survival, and finally, (e) the identification of microsatellite instability. 
3.1.1. Diagnosis 
DL techniques can assist in the process of  pathology diagnosis [14]. The algorithms 
perform a binary classification, for instance, cancer/non-cancer, colon benign tissue/colon 
ADC. 
The classification of the tumor regions in WSIs by AI-based models could assist in 
the time-consuming process of a microscopical examination. The suggested models in the 
study by Gupta et al. classified normal and abnormal tissue in CRC slides and localized 
the cancer regions with good performance metrics [36]. Zhou et al. used global labels for 
tumor classification and localization without the need for annotated images [37]. In the 
Records identified from MEDLINE 
database (n = 166)
Records screened (n = 166)
Reports assessed for eligibility           
(n = 92)
Studies included in systematic review     
(n = 82)
• Endoscopic images (n = 21)
• Review article (n = 20)
• No clinical endpoint of interest (n = 11)
• Not colon (n = 5)
• Medical imaging (n = 4)
• Meta-analysis (n = 3)
• Non-photonic microscopy (n = 3)
• Benign entities (n = 3)
• Not imaging deep learning (n = 2)
• In vitro (n = 1)
• Not human (n = 1)
Records excluded (n = 74)
• Not colon (n = 4)
• Medical imaging (n = 1)
• No clinical endpoint of interest (n = 1)
• Not English (n = 1)
• Not imaging deep learning (n = 1)
• Non-photonic microscopy (n = 1)
• Benign entities (n = 1)
Reports excluded (n = 10)
Identification of studies via MEDLINE database
IdentificationScreeningIncluded
Deep Learning
Convolutional 
Neural Networks 
(CNNs)
Generative 
Adversarial 
Networks (GANs)
CRC
Custom 
Architectures
Pretrained 
Architectures & 
Transfer Learning
Microsatellite 
Instability
Tumor Tissue 
Classification
Histological 
Features
Medical Viewpoint Technical Viewpoint
Cancer/not Cancer
Benign/Colon ADC
Benign/malignant
Tumor 
microenvironment
Grade
Multi-class
Glands
Diagnosis
Nuclei
Biomarkers (IHC)
Novel 
Architectures
from scratch layer 
building 
VGG/Inception.v3/
ResNet/U-Net etc.
CGAN/SAFRON
Popular CNN 
Modifications
Method 
Combinations
Ensemble 
Methods
Figure 3. Tree diagram for the categorization of the studies.
3.1.1. Diagnosis
DL techniques can assist in the process of pathology diagnosis [14]. The algorithms per-
form a binary classiﬁcation, for instance, cancer/non-cancer, colon benign tissue/colon ADC.
The classiﬁcation of the tumor regions in WSIs by AI-based models could assist in
the time-consuming process of a microscopical examination. The suggested models in the
study by Gupta et al. classiﬁed normal and abnormal tissue in CRC slides and localized
the cancer regions with good performance metrics [ 36]. Zhou et al. used global labels
for tumor classiﬁcation and localization without the need for annotated images [ 37]. In
the same framework, DL algorithms performed a binary classiﬁcation of CRC images for

Diagnostics 2022, 12, 837 7 of 32
detecting cancerous from non-cancerous regions, achieving good performance metrics and
supporting the potential for use in clinical practice [38–42]. A recent study evaluating the
segmentation performance of different DL models, showed that AI-patch-based models
had great advantages, although this segmentation approach could result in lower accuracy
when more challenging tumor images are included [ 43]. Moreover, AI-based models
could be combined to persistent homology proﬁles (PHPs) and effectively identify normal
from tumor tissue regions, evaluating the nuclear characteristics of tumor cells [ 44]. A
patch-cluster-based aggregation model, including a great number of WSIs developed by
Wang et al., performed the classiﬁcation of CRC images (cancer, not cancer) assessing
the clustering of tumor cells, and the results were comparable to pathologists’ diagnosis,
revealing no statistical difference [45]. The acceleration of tumor detection by CNNs could
be obtained by reducing the number of patches, taking care to select the most representative
regions of interest [46]. Both proposed methods in the study of Shen et al. performed with
good accuracy and efﬁciency in detecting negative cases. Lastly, Yu et al., using a large
dataset, demonstrated that SSL, with large amounts of unlabeled data, performed well at
patch-level recognition and had a similar AUC as pathologists [47].
Colon benign tissue and colon ADC were classiﬁed with good accuracy by DL models
developed by To˘ gaçar et al. and Masud et al. [48,49]. The study of Song et al. showed
that the DL model and the pathologists’ estimation were in agreement in diagnosing
CRC [50]. However, the binary classiﬁcation algorithm for adenoma and non-cancerous
(including mucosa or chronic inﬂammation) tiles showed a proportion of false predictions
in challenging tiles consisting of small adenomatous glands.
The accurate identiﬁcation of benign from malignant tissues achieved a sensitivity
of 0.8228 and speciﬁcity of 0.9114 by a DL model trained with Multiphoton microscopy
(MPM) images, although images were lacking biomarkers such as colonic crypts and goblet
cells [51]. Holland et al. used the same classiﬁcation model and 7 training datasets consist-
ing of a descending number of images [52]. The mean generalization accuracy appeared to
rely on the number of images within the different training sets and CNNs, although the
larger datasets did not result in a higher mean generalization accuracy, as expected.
3.1.2. Tumor Tissue Classiﬁcation (Non-Neoplastic, Benign, Malignant, Grade, Architecture
and Cellular Characteristics)
Lizuka et al. conducted a classiﬁcation of CRC into adenocarcinoma, adenoma or
normal tissue on three different test sets, revealing great performance metrics and promising
results for clinical practice [ 53]. The progression of CRC could be assessed by CNN,
designed to identify benign hyperplasia, intraepithelial neoplasia, and carcinoma using
multispectral images, however, the contribution of the pathologist’s assessment and a bigger
dataset were required [54]. Another study demonstrated that colorectal histological images
could be classiﬁed into normal mucosa, an early preneoplastic lesion, adenoma and cancer
with good accuracy, although these four classes may occasionally overlap and result in
uncertainty in labeling [55]. Moreover, the ARA-CNN model was designed for an accurate,
reliable and active tumor classiﬁcation in the histopathological slides, aiming to minimize
the uncertainty of mislabeled samples [56]. The model achieved great performance metrics
not only in the binary, but also in the multiclass tumor classiﬁcation, such as the proposed
CNN by Xu et al. and Wang et al. [57,58]. Three studies by Papadini et al., Jiao et al. and
Ben Hamida et al. proposed CNN approaches for multi-class colorectal tissue classiﬁcation
in a large dataset number, underlining the great potential of AI-based methods to efﬁciently
perform multiple classiﬁcations of tumor regions [59–61]. Repurposing a stomach model
trained in poorly differentiated cases of gastric ADC using a transfer learning method, DL
algorithms could perform the classiﬁcation of poorly differentiated adenocarcinoma in
colorectal biopsy WSIs, beneﬁting from histological similarities between gastric and colon
ADC [62].
The challenging task of gland segmentation was approached by Xu et al. and Graham
et al., developing CNNs for gland segmentation and achieving a good performance in

Diagnostics 2022, 12, 837 8 of 32
statistical metrics as well as generalization capability [ 63,64]. In addition, Kainz et al.
trained two networks to recognize and separate glands which achieved 95% and 98%
classiﬁcation accuracy in two test sets [ 65]. Further research, both in H&E-stained and IHC
images of colorectal tissue, was performed for glandular epithelium segmentation [66].
Grading into normal, low-grade and high-grade CRC was approached by Awan et al.
and Shaban et al. with 91% and 95.7% accuracy, respectively, using the same dataset [67,68].
Lastly, the grading of colorectal images was performed by an unsupervised feature extractor
via DL, showing great accuracy, although, as expected, the subcategorization of low-grade
tissue images had reduced the accuracy [69].
3.1.3. Tumor Microenvironment
An automated assessment of the CRC tumor microenvironment was carried out,
including the stroma, necrosis and lymphocytes associated with progression-free intervals
(PFI) [70]. Jiao et al. demonstrated that a higher tumor–stroma ratio was a risk factor, whilst
high levels of necrosis and lymphocytes features were associated with a low PFI. Pham’s
et al. proposed a DL model for binary and 8-class tumor classiﬁcation in CRC images, as
well as, for the prediction and prognosis of the protein marker, DNp73 in IHC rectal cancer
images provided perfect results and outperformed other CNNs [71]. Pai et al. conducted
a tumor microenvironment analysis in colorectal TMAs [ 72]. The algorithm efﬁciently
detected differences between MMRD and MMRP slides based on inﬂammatory stroma,
tumor inﬁltrating lymphocytes (TILs) and mucin, and the quantiﬁed proportion of tumor
budding (TB), and poorly differentiated clusters (PDCs) associated with lymphatic, venous
and perineural invasion. A Desmoplastic Reaction (DR) could be also classiﬁed by DL
algorithms in CRC histopathological slides containing the deepest tumor invasion area [73].
The classiﬁcation of a DR based on a myxoid stroma could be a signiﬁcant prognostic
marker for patients’ survival.
Comprehensive analysis of the tumor microenvironment proved to show a great
performance by the ImmunoAIzer, a DL model for cell distribution description and tumor
gene mutation status detection in CRC images, proposed by Bian et al. [74]. Optimal results
were achieved in accuracy and precision for biomarker prediction, including CD3, CD20,
TP53 and DAPI. Additionally, the suggested DL framework could effectively quantify
TILs, PD-1 expressing TILs in anti-PD-1 immunoﬂuorescence staining images, as well as
detect APC and TP53. Lymphocytes could be detected in colorectal IHC images stained
positive for CD3 and CD8 biomarkers by 4 different CNNs, with U-Net showing the best
performance according to the F1 score [75]. In the same framework, Xu et al. proposed a
DL model for the quantiﬁcation of the immune inﬁltration (CD3 and CD8 T-cells’ density)
within the stroma region using IHC slides [ 76]. The CNN-IHC model performed with
high accuracy and was efﬁcient in predicting survival probability, which was increased
when patients had a higher stromal immune score. Predictions of genetic mutation genes,
such as APC, KRAS, PIK3CAM SMAD4, TP53 and BRAF, could be followed through the
DL algorithms to support the clinical diagnosis and better stratify patients for targeted
therapies [77,78]. Schrammen et al. proposed the Slide-Level Assessment Model (SLAM) for
simultaneously tumor detection and predictions of genetic alterations [79]. In a 2017 study,
recognizing the molecular tumor subtype based on histopathology image data, Popovici
et al. proposed a challenging approach utilizing a DCNN, which was effective in predicting
relapse-free survival [80]. Xu et al. compared a DCNN to handcraft feature representation
in IHC slides of CRC, stained for an Epidermal Growth Factor Receptor (EGFR), and
demonstrated that the DCNN showed a better performance versus the handcrafted features
in classifying epithelial and stromal regions [81]. In addition, Sarker et al. developed a DL
approach for the identiﬁcation and characterization of an Inducible T-cell COStimulator
(ICOS) biomarker, which achieved high accuracy in the ICOS density estimation and
showed potential as a prognostic factor [82]. Tumor budding could be quantiﬁed in CRC
IHC slides stained for pan-cytokeratin, whereas a high tumor budding score was correlated
to a positive nodal status [83].

Diagnostics 2022, 12, 837 9 of 32
Analysis for cell nuclei types (epithelial, inﬂammatory, ﬁbroblasts, “other”) by a CNN
model trained on 853 annotated images showed a 76% classiﬁcation accuracy [ 26]. All
four cell types were associated with clinical variables, for instance, fewer inﬂammatory
cells were related to mucinous carcinoma, while metastasis, residual tumors, as well
as venous invasion were related to lower numbers of epithelial cells. A similar study, by
Sirinukunwattana et al., described a CNN method for the detection and classiﬁcation of four
cell nuclei types (epithelial, inﬂammatory, ﬁbroblast and miscellaneous) in histopathological
images of CRC [ 84]. Höfener et al. used the same dataset as Sirinukunwattana et al.
for nuclei detection from Cthe NNs based on the PMap approach [ 85]. A novel CNN
architecture, Hover-net, was proposed by Graham et al. for the simultaneous segmentation
and classiﬁcation of nuclei, as well as for the prediction of 4 different nuclear types [86]. In
2017, the deep contour-aware network (DCAN) was developed by Chen et al. for accurate
gland and nuclei segmentations on histological CRC images [87].
3.1.4. Histological Features Related to Prognosis, Metastasis and Survival
A peri-tumoral stroma (PTS) score evaluated by CNNs was signiﬁcantly higher in
patients with positive lymph nodes compared to the Lymph Node Metastasis (LNM)-
negative group [88]. However, due to the small dataset and the selection of classes used,
the PTS score for LNM and extramural tumor deposits in early-stage CRC was not detected.
Kiehl et al. and Brockmoeller et al. showed that LNM could be predicted by DL models
with a good performance [89,90]. Furthermore, the incidence of metastasis in histologic
slides with one or more lymph nodes was predicted by CNN, with good accuracy, both for
micro- and macro-metastases [91].
Bychkov et al., using TMAs of the most representative tumor area of CRC, proved the
efﬁciency of a DL model to predict the 5-year disease-speciﬁc survival (DSS), while Skrede
et al. reported data for the prediction of cancer-speciﬁc survival [ 92,93]. Similarly, DSS was
predicted by a DL model and clinicopathological features, such as poorly differentiated
tumor cell clusters, were associated with high DL risk scores [94]. A Crohn-like lymphoid
reaction (CLR) density at the invasive front of the tumor was a good predictor of prognosis
in patients with advanced CRC, independent of the TNM stage and tumor–stroma ratio [95].
Determining the ratio of the desmoplastic and inﬂamed stroma in histopathological slides
by DL models could be of great value in predicting the recurrence of disease after rectal
excision and a lower desmoplastic to inﬂamed stroma ratio was associated with a good
prognosis [96]. Tumor–stroma ratio (TSR) measures could be an important prognostic factor
and, as shown by Zhao et al. and Geesink et al., a stroma-high score was associated with
reduced overall survival [97,98]. The “deep stroma score” by Kather et al., a combination
of non-tumor components of the tissue, could be an independent prognostic factor for
overall survival, especially in patients with advanced CRC [ 99]. IHC slides stained for
pan-cytokeratin from patients with pT3 and pT4 colon ADC were used to train a DCNN
to predict the occurrence of distant metastasis based on tumor architecture [100]. Another
study showed that IHC-stained images of the ampliﬁed breast cancer 1 (AIB1) protein from
CRC patients could operate as a predictive 5-year survival marker [101].
3.1.5. Microsatellite Instability
Deploying the dataset of the MSIDETECT consortium, Echle et al. developed a DL
detector for the identiﬁcation of MSI in histopathological slides [102]. High MSI scores were
accompanied by the presence of a poorly differentiated tumor tissue, however, false MSI
scores were also noted in necrotic and lymphocyte inﬁltrated areas. The binary classiﬁcation
of DL algorithms for predicting MSI and MSS status in CRC images was performed in
studies by Wang, Yamashita, Bustos and Cao et al., with the latter study associating MSI
with genomic and transcriptomic proﬁles [103–106]. Another MSS/MSI-H classiﬁer model
was trained on tumor-rich patch images for better classiﬁcation results, although some
images were misclassiﬁed indicating that a larger dataset was required [107]. Generating
synthesized histology images could also be utilized by DL models for detecting MSI in

Diagnostics 2022, 12, 837 10 of 32
CRC, as demonstrated by Krause et al. [108]. A synthetic dataset achieved an almost similar
AUC in predicting MSI compared to real images, although the best performance was noted
when a combination of synthetic and real images was generated. Image-based consensus
molecular subtype (CMS) classiﬁcation in CRC histological slides from 3 datasets showed
a good performance, and the slides having the highest prediction conﬁdence were in
concordance with the histological image features [109]. In another study, CMS classiﬁcation
was associated with mucin-to-tumor area quantiﬁcation, and revealed that CMS2 CRC
had no mucin and MUC5AC protein expression was an indication for worse overall
survival [110]. Lastly, a CNN for predicting tumor mutational burden-high (TMB-H) in
H&E slides was developed by Shimada et al. and showed an AUC of 0.91, while high
AUC scores were also noted in the validation cohorts [111]. TMB-H was associated with
TILs, although further development is important for this CNN model to be included in
clinical practice.
3.2. Technical Viewpoint
The presented DL methods for image analysis in colorectal histopathology images
could follow a categorization close to the one presented, which is presented in the back-
ground section. The systematic review indicates a rapid implementation of the ﬁeld,
presenting DL applications that cover many technical approaches. Most of the presented
works in the literature employ a Convolution Neural Network in different segmentation
and classiﬁcation problems (i.e., binary classiﬁcation for the diagnosis or prognosis of
cancer, multiclass problems to characterize different tissue types, segmentation problems
for the detection of the microenvironment of the tissue). According to the scope of the
study, the authors proposed an appropriate architecture, providing the performance of their
method and perhaps comparing with other already developed CNNs. Few studies used
GANs to improve the training of the network, while several of them extended architectures
for encoding and decoding, such as U-Net. Recent studies took the advantage of a high
classiﬁcation performance, developing retrospective or cohort studies based on the DL
results. Technically, almost all the studies utilized popular machine learning environments,
such as PyTorch, TensorFlow, Keras, Fastai, etc., which provided robust implementations
of DL approaches. The main category of CNN application can be divided into three subcat-
egories: (i) custom CNN architectures, (ii) popular architectures with transfer learning, and
ﬁnally, (iii) novel architectures, ensemble CNNs or frameworks.
3.2.1. Custom CNN Architecture
Custom CNN architectures denote those approaches where the authors built, from
scratch, all the layers of the network, visualizing in detail the feature extraction layers, the
fully connected layers of the classiﬁer, as well as all the layers between of them. Commonly,
these architectures consisted of few layers and a small number of parameters, instead of the
well-known architectures where the networks expanded and were deeper than custom ones.
In several cases, custom CNNs performed well for typical simple problems, where it was
probably meaningful to avoid complex architectures and networks with a high consuming
computational effort. Several proposed custom CNNs were constructed, containing up
to 4 convolution layers for feature extraction and up to 2 fully connected layers for the
classiﬁer [ 38,45,53,66,80]. For example, one of the ﬁrst presented methods by Xu et al.
classiﬁed the regions of the image as the epithelium or stroma, employing a simple CNN
within a total of 4 layers (2 convolution and 2 fully connected) [81]. Other research teams
implemented deeper architectures than the latter, including at least 8 layers [ 40,83,98].
For example, one of the most recent studies used a custom architecture of 15 layers (12
convolutional and 3 fully connected) for diagnosis purposes [40]. Finally, the most complex
custom CNN, proposed by Graham et al. and called MilD-Net+, provides simultaneous
gland and lumen segmentation [64].

Diagnostics 2022, 12, 837 11 of 32
3.2.2. Popular Architectures with Transfer Learning
The most comfortable way to apply CNNs on imaging problems is the utilization of
the machine learning environments, where researchers can easily call already developed
architecture. Such architectures gradually became very popular due to their standard im-
plementation as well as their ability to transfer learning from the training in other datasets.
According to the concept of transfer learning, it is less computationally expensive to employ
a pre-trained deep network instead of a network with randomly generated weights, even if
the training set includes images with different characteristics and classes. As a result, in
most of the cases, the popular models were trained on the ImageNet dataset, which con-
tained many images of different sources [27]. The most common pre-trained model used for
CRC is based on the VGG architectures. Four of the studies, presented by Zhao et al. [95,97],
Xu et al. [76] and Jiao et al. [70], employed the VGG-19, while two of the studies employed
the VGG-16 [41,101]. Furthermore, two other studies compared different parameters of the
general VGG architecture [38,80]. The second and third mostly used CNN for CRC is the
Inception.v3 [39,45,53,77,111], the Resnet (ResNet-50 used by Chuang et al. [91], ResNet-18
used by Kiehl et al. [90] and Bilal et al. [78], and ResNet-34 used by Bustos et al. [105] and
Bilal et al. [78]), or the combination of them called the InceptionResNet.v2 [ 100]. These
architectures introduced the Inception and the residual blocks, which made the model less
sensitive to overﬁtting. Interesting approaches [67,70,88] were developed using either the
U-Net model, where the initial image was encoded to a low resolution and then decoded,
providing images with similar characteristics or the ShufﬂeNet [80,91,103]. Finally, other
well-known models were also used, such as AlexNet [ 57], the YOLO detector [ 75], the
CiFar Model [25], the DenseNet [ 73], the MobileNet [ 94], LSTM [71], Xception [51], the
DarkNet [48] and EfﬁcientNetB1 [62].
In the category with the pre-trained popular models, all the comparative works
could be included. These studies employed either the well-known models referenced
above [36,61], or other models such as GoogleNet [99], SqueezeNet [52] and ResNeXT [43].
Finally, two studies utilized [72] or proposed [103] cloud platforms where the user can ﬁne
tune several hyper-parameters of popular pre-trained architectures.
3.2.3. Novel Architectures
Many research teams focus on the technical innovation evaluating their proposed
methodologies in colorectal image datasets. The studies of these categories are mostly (a)
modiﬁcations of popular architectures, (b) combinations of techniques into a framework, or
(c) ensemble approaches.
Several modiﬁed architectures were the HoVer-Net [64] based on the Preact-ResNet-
50, the KimiaNet [112] based on the DenseNet, the architecture proposed by Yamashita
et al. [104] based on the MobiledNet, and ﬁnally, the modiﬁcation of the loss functions on
the ResNet proposed by Medela et al. [113]. Finally, Bian et al. [74] proposed an CNN based
on the Inception.v3, adding several residual blocks.
Several studies engaged a CNN architecture with other sophisticated methods and
concepts of artiﬁcial intelligence. One of the ﬁrst attempts in the ﬁeld was developed by
Sirinukunwattana et al., proposing a combination of a custom CNN architectures with
the Spatial Constrain Regression [ 84]. A similar concept developed two custom CNN
architectures with PMaps approaches [85]. Chen et al. presented a novel deep contour-
aware network for the detection and classiﬁcation of the nuclei [87]. A Deep Belief Network
for feature extraction, followed by the Support Vector Machines for classiﬁcation, was
deployed by Sari et al. [69]. A recent work employed a Deep embedding-based Logistic
Regression (DELR), which also used active learning for sample selection strategy [ 60].
In two other studies, the DenseNet was combined with Monte Carlo approaches [ 46],
while the Inception.v3 was cooperated with Adversarial Learning [ 109]. Finally, Kim
et al. [ 114] combined the InceptionResNet.v2 with Principal Component Analysis and
Wavelet Transform.

Diagnostics 2022, 12, 837 12 of 32
Some other research teams combined two or more CNNs on a single framework. Two
different approaches combined the VGG architectures with the concept of the ResNet[66,92],
while the ARA-CNN, proposed by Raczkowski et al. [56], combined the ReSNet with the
DarkNet. Lee et al. [107] proposed a framework of an initial custom architecture followed
by the Inception.v3. Furthermore, three frameworks based on the ResNet were developed
by Zhou et al. [37]. Shaban et al. [68] developed a novel context-aware framework consist-
ing of two stacked CNNs. Finally, another combination between different architectures,
which was presented in the literature, is the DeepLab.v2 with ResNet-34 [50].
In recent years, voting systems are increasingly used for classiﬁcation purposes. These
ensemble approaches engage two or more algorithms, where the prediction of the highest
performance ﬁnally prevails. The ﬁrst ensemble pipeline was presented by Cao et al. in
2020, which votes according to the likelihood extracted from ResNet-18 [ 106]. Nguyen
et al. [42,110] proposed an ensemble approach with two CNNs (VGG and CapsuleNet),
while Kheded et al. deployed an approach with three CNNs as combination backbones:
(a) the U-Net with the ResNet, (b) the U-Net with the InceptionResNet.v2 and (c) the
DeepLab.v3 with Xception [115]. Another ensemble framework was developed by Skrede
et al. [ 93], with ten CNN models based on the DoMore.v1. The most extended voting
systems were presented by Paladini et al. [59], who introduced two ensemble approaches
using the ResNet-101, ResNeXt-50, Inception-v3 and DenseNet-161. In the ﬁrst one, called
the Mean-Ensemble-CNN approach, the predicted class of each image was assigned using
the average of the predicted probabilities of the four trained models, while in the second
one, called the NN-Ensemble-CNN approach, the deep features corresponding to the last
FC layer are extracted from the four trained models.
3.2.4. Improving Training with GANs
Apart for the segmentation and classiﬁcation, DL in CRC has also been applied for the
improvement of the training dataset using GANs. There have been three works with GANs’
applications presented during the past two years. In the ﬁrst attempt [ 108], a Conditional
Generative Adversarial Network (CGAN), consisting of six convolution layers for both
the generator and the discriminator network, was employed to train the ShufﬂeNet for
the classiﬁcation. Finally, a very recent study presented a novel GAN architecture, called
SAFRON [116], which enabled the generation of images of arbitrarily large sizes after
training on relatively small image patches.

Diagnostics 2022, 12, 837 13 of 32
Table 1. Deep learning methods on histopathological images for colorectal cancer diagnosis.
Year First Author Journal Aim of Medical
Research Technical Method Classiﬁcation
Details Dataset Performance Metrics
2016
Sirinukunwattana
[84]
IEEE Trans
Med Imaging
Detection and
classiﬁcation of nuclei
Custom CNN architecture
(7-versions) based on the
spatially Constrain Regression
(a priori)
4-class: epithelial,
inﬂammatory, ﬁbroblast,
miscellaneous
>20,000 annotated nuclei from
100 histology images from
10 WSIs
Detection Precision: 0.781,
Recall: 0.827, F1 score: 0.802,
Classiﬁcation F1 score: 0.784,
AUC: 0.917, Combined
detection and classiﬁcation F1
score: 0.692
Xu
[81] Neurocomputing
Classiﬁcation of
epithelial and
stromal regions
Custom Simple CNN
Architecture with 4 Layers
(2 × CL and 2 FC) with SVM
Binary (epithelium/stroma) 1376 IHC-stained images
of CRC
Classiﬁcation F1 score: 100%,
ACC: 100%, MCC: 100%
2017
Chen
[87] Med Image Anal Detection and
classiﬁcation of nuclei
Custom CNN: Novel deep
contour-aware network Binary (bening/malignant)
(1) 2015 MICCAI Gland
Segmentation Challenge,
Training 85 Images Testing 80,
(2) 2015 MICCAI Nuclei
Segmentation Challenge:
Training 15 Images, Testing
18 images
Detection results (MICCAI
Glas): F1 score = 0.887, DICE
index 0.868
Hausdorff = 74.731
Segmentation results: D1 and
D2 metrics from Challenge
Popovici
[80] Bioinformatics Prediction of
molecular subtypes VGG-f (MatConvNet library)
5-class: subtypes (Budinská
et al., 2013) Molecular
subtypes (denoted A-E)
PETACCURACY:3 clinical
trial (Van Cutsem et al., 2009)
300 H/E images
ACC: 0.84, Confusion metrics
Precision and Recall per class
Xu
[63]
IEEE Trans
Biomed Eng Classiﬁcation of Glands
Custom architecture:
3 channel fusions, one based
on Faster R-CNN and two
based on VGG-16
Binary (bening/malignant)
2015 MICCAI Gland
Segmentation Challenge,
Training 85 Images Testing
80 Images
Detection results (MICCAI
Glas): F1 score
(0.893 + 0.843)/2, DICE index
(0.908 + 0.833)/2, Hausdorff
(44.129 + 116.821)/2
Haj-Hassan
[54] J Pathol Inform Tumor tissue
classiﬁcation
Custom Simple CNN (2CL
and 1FC), with or without
initial segmentation
3-class: benign hyperplasia,
intraepithelial neoplasia,
carcinoma
CHU Nancy Brabois Hospital:
16 multispectral images
Dice and Jaccard with std for
segmentation ACC: 99.17%
Xu
[57]
BMC
Bioinformatics
Tumor tissue
classiﬁcation
Alexnet—SVM (shared by the
Cognitive Vision team at
ImageNet LSVRC 2013)
(1) Binary (cancer/not cancer
(2) 6-class: normal (N), ADC,
mucinous carcinoma
(MC),serrated carcinoma (SC),
papillary carcinoma (PC),
cribriform comedo-type
adenocarcinoma (CCTA)
2014 MICCAI 2014 Brain
Tumor Digital Pathology
Challenge and CRC image
dataset (1) Total 717 H/E
Total 693
ACC:
(1) Binary: 98%
(2) Multiclass: 87.2%
Jia
[41]
IEEE Trans
Med Imaging Diagnosis 3 Stage VGG-16 (publicly
available Caffe toolbox)
(1) Binary (Cancer/non
cancer) (2) Binary: TMAs
(Cancer/non-Cancer)
(1) 330/580 images (CA/NC)
(2) 30/30 images (CA/NC)
(2) ODS: 0.447, F-measure:
0.622 (CA), 0.998 (NC)
Kainz
[65] PeerJ Classiﬁcation of Glands 2 × custom CNNs
(4 × CL, 2 × FC)
4-class (benign, benign
background, malignant,
malignant background) add
background for each class of
the challenge
2015 MICCAI Gland
Segmentation Challenge,
Training 85 Images (37 benign
and 48 malignant). Testing
80 (37/43)
Detection results (MICCAI
Glas): F1 score =
(0.68 + 0.61)/2, DICE index
(0.75 + 0.65)/2, Hausdorff
(103.49 + 187.76)/2

Diagnostics 2022, 12, 837 14 of 32
Table 1. Cont.
Year First Author Journal Aim of Medical
Research Technical Method Classiﬁcation
Details Dataset Performance Metrics
Awan
[67] Sci Rep Grading of CRC UNET-based architecture
(A) Binary (normal/cancer)
(B) 3-class: normal/low
grade/high grade
38 WSIs, extracted 139 parts
(71 normal, 33 low grade,
35 high grade)
(A) Binary ACC: 97%
(B) 3-vlass ACC: 91%
Wang
[58]
Annu Int Conf IEEE
Eng Med Biol Soc
Tumor tissue
classiﬁcation
Simple architecture consisting
of 1 CL and 1 FC, which is
simultaneously operated in
both decomposed images
8-class: tumor epithelium,
simple stroma, complex
stroma, immune
cells, debris, normal mucosal
glands, adipose
tissue, background
University Medical Center
Mannheim 1.000 images ACC: 92.6 ± 1.2
2018
Bychkov
[92] Sci Rep Survival VGG-16 followed by a
recurrent ResNet
Binary (low/high risk 5-year
disease-speciﬁc survival)
Helsinki University Central
Hospital, 420 TMAs
Hazard Ratio: 2.3; CI 95%:
1.79–3.03, AUC 0.69
Eycke
[66] Med Image Anal
Tumor tissue
classiﬁcation/IHC
biomarkers
quantiﬁcation
VGG-based architecture
including residual units Binary (bening/malignant)
2015 MICCAI Gland
Segmentation Challenge,
Training 85 Images Testing
80 (37/43)
Detection results (MICCAI
Glas): F1 score
= (0.895 + 0.788)/2, DICE
index (0.902 + 0.841)/2,
Hausdorff
(42.943 + 105.926)/2
Weis
[83] Diagn Pathol Evaluation of
tumor budding
Custom architecture
consisting of 8 layers
Binary
(Tumor bud/no tumor)
HeiData Training dataset 6292
images, 20 IHC
pan-cytokeratin WSIs
R2 value: 0.86
Höfener
[85]
Comput Med
Imaging Graph Nuclei detection
2 × Custom CNN
architectures based on
PMaps approach
No classiﬁcation, just
nuclei detection
Same with Sirinukunwattana
et al., >20,000 annotated
nuclei from 100 histology
images, from 10 WSI
F1 score of 22 different
conﬁgurations of CNNs
Best F1 score: 0.828
Graham
[64] Med Image Anal Diagnosis Custom complex architecture,
named Mild-net Binary (bening/malignant)
(1) MICCAI Gland
Segmentation Challenge,
(2) same as Awan et al., 2017
(1) F1 socre: (0.914 + 0.844)/2,
Dice: (0.913 + 0.836)/2,
Hausdorff (41.54 + 105.89)/2
(2) F1 score: 0.825, Dice: 0.875,
Hausdorff: 160.14
2019
Yoon
[38] J Digit Imaging Diagnosis 6 VGG-based approaches Binary (normal/Cancer)
Center for CRC, National
Cancer Center, Korea,
57 WSIs, 10.280 patches
ACC: 93.48%, SP: 92.76%, SE:
95.1%
Sari
[69]
IEEE Trans
Med Imaging Grading of CRC
Feature Extraction from Deep
Belief Network and
classiﬁcation employing linear
SVM, Comparison with
Alexnet, GoogleNet,
Inceptionv3, and
autoencoders
(1) 3-class: normal (N), Low
Grade (LG), High Grade (HG)
(2) 5-class: Normal, Low (1),
Low (1–2), Low (2), High
(1) 3236 images 1001 N, 1703
LG, 532 HG)
(2) 1468 images
(1) mean ACC: 96.13
(2) mean ACC: 79.28

Diagnostics 2022, 12, 837 15 of 32
Table 1. Cont.
Year First Author Journal Aim of Medical
Research Technical Method Classiﬁcation
Details Dataset Performance Metrics
Kather
[99] PLoS Med Prediction of survival
5 different well-known
architectures pre-trained with
ImageNet (1) VGG-19, (2)
AlexNet, (3) SqueezeNet, (4)
GoogleNet, (5) ResNet
9-class: adipose
tissue, background, debris,
lymphocytes, mucus, smooth
muscle, normal colon mucosa,
cancer-associated stroma,
CRC epithelium/survival
predictions
(1) NCT, UMM 86 WSIs
(100.000 patches)
(2) 25 WSIs DACHS
(3) 862 WSIs TCGA WSIs
(4) 409 WSIs DACHS
9-class: ACC: 94–99%
Geessink
[98] Cell Onocol
Quantiﬁcation of
tumor–stroma ratio
(TSR) for prognosis
Custom architecture proposed
by Ciombi et al., 2017 (not
included by our search)
9-class: tumor, intratumoral
stroma, necrosis, muscle,
healthy epithelium, fatty
tissue, lymphocytes, mucus,
erythrocytes
Laboratory for Pathology
Eastern Netherlands
74 WSIs
Overall ACC: 94.6%
Shapcott
[26]
Front Bioeng
Biotechnol Classiﬁcation of nuclei CNN based on Tensorﬂow
“ciFar” model
4-class:
epithelial/inﬂammatory/
ﬁbroblast/other
853 images, 142 TCGA images Detection ACC: 65%
Classiﬁcation ACC: 76%
Qaiser
[44] Med Image Anal Diagnosis
Custom architecture with
(4 × CL + (ELU), 2FC +
Dropout
Binary: tumor/non-tumor
(1) Warwick-UHCW 75 H/E
WSIs (112.500 patches),
(2) Warwick-Osaka 50 H/E
WSIs (75.000 patches)
(A) PHP/CNN: F1 score
0.9243, Precision 0.9267
(B) PHP/CNN: F1 score
0.8273, Precision 0.8311
Swiderska-Chadaj
[75] Med Image Anal Detection of
lymphocytes
4-different architectures:
(1) Custom with 12CL, (2)
U-net, (3) YOLLO (based on
YOLO detector), (4) LSM
(Sirinukunwattana et al. 2016)
3-class: regular lymphocyte
distribution/clustered
cells/artifacts
28 IHC WSIs
U-Net
F1: 0.80
Recall: 0.74
Precision: 0.86
Graham
[86] Med Image Anal Classiﬁcation of nuclei
Novel CNN architecture
(named HoVer-Net) based on
Preact-ResNet50
4-class: normal, malignant,
dysplastic
epithelial/inﬂammatory/
miscellaneous/spindle-
shaped nuclei (ﬁbroblast,
muscle, endothelial)
(1) CoNSeP dataset, 16 WSIs,
41 H/E tiles, (2) Kumar
(TCGA) 30 images,
(3) CPM-15 (TCGA) 15 images,
(4) CPM-17 (TCGA) 32 images,
(5) TNBC (Curie Institute)
50 images, (6) CRCHisto
100 images
(1) Dice: 0.853, AJI: 0.571, DQ:
0.702, SQ: 0.778, PQ: 0.547, (2)
Dice: 0.826, AJI: 0.618, DQ:
0.770, SQ: 0.773, PQ: 0.597, (4)
Dice: 0.869, AJI: 0.705, DQ:
0.854, SQ: 0.814, PQ: 0.697
R ˛ aczkowski
[56] Sci Rep Tumor tissue
classiﬁcation
Novel architecture (named
ARA-CNN), based on ResNet
and DarkNet
(A) Binary: tumor/stroma
(B) 8-class: tumor epithelium,
simple stroma, complex
stroma, immune cells, debris,
normal mucosal glands,
adipose tissue, background
5000 patches (same as
Kather et al., 2016)
(1) AUC 0.998 ACC: 99.11 ±
0.97% (2) AUC 0.995 ACC:
92.44 ± 0.81%
Sena
[55] Oncol Lett Tumor tissue
classiﬁcation Custom CNN (4CL, 3FC)
4-class: normal mucosa,
preneoplastic lesion,
adenoma, cancer
Modena University Hospital,
393 WSIs ACC: 81.7

Diagnostics 2022, 12, 837 16 of 32
Table 1. Cont.
Year First Author Journal Aim of Medical
Research Technical Method Classiﬁcation
Details Dataset Performance Metrics
2020
Iizuka
[53] Sci Rep Tumor tissue
classiﬁcation
(1) Inception v3, (2) also train
an RNN using the features
extracted by the Inception
3-class:
adenocarcinoma/adenoma/
non-neoplastic
Hiroshima University
Hospital, Haradoi Hospital,
TCGA, 4.036 WSIs
(1) AUC: (ADC: 0.967,
Adenoma: 0.99),
(2) AUC: (ADC: 0.963,
Adenoma: 0.992)
Shaban
[68]
IEEE Trans
Med Imaging Grading of CRC
Novel context-aware
framework, consisting of two
stacked CNNs
3-Class: Normal, Low Grade,
High Grade
Same as Awan et al., 2017
30000 patches ACC: 95.70
Holland
[52] J Pathol Inform Diagnosis
(1) ResNet (Turi Create library
framework), (2) SqueezeNet
(Turi Create library
framework), (3) AlexNet
(TensorFlow)
Binary (benign/malignant) 10 slides,
1000 overlapping images
(1) ResNET: ACC: 98%,
(2) AlexNet: ACC: 92.1%
(3) SqueezeNet: ACC: 80.4%
Echle
[102] Gastroenterology MSI prediction A modiﬁed version of
Sufﬂenet (no details) Binary (MSI/MSS)
TCGA, Darmkrebs: Chancen
der Verhütung durch
Screening (DACHS), “Quick
and Simple and Reliable”
trial (QUASAR), Netherlands
Cohort Study (NLCS)
QUASAR
Cross-validation cohort: mean
AUC 0.92, AUPRC of 0.63
Validation cohort: AUROC
0.95 (without
image-preprocessing) and
AUROC 0.96 (after color
normalization)
Song
[50] BMJ Diagnosis
A novel architecture based on
DeepLab v2 and ResNet-34.
Comparison with ResNet-50,
DenseNet, Inception.v3,
U-Net and DeepLab.v3
Binary (colorectal
adenoma/non-neoplasm)
Chinese People’s Liberation
Army
General Hospital, 411 slides
CJFH and
Cancer Hospital, Chinese
Academy of Medical Sciences
168 slides
ACC: 90.4, AUC 0.92
Zhao
[98] EBioMedicine
Quantiﬁcation of
Tumor–stroma ratio
(TSR) for prognosis
VGG-19 pre-trained on the
ImageNet using transfer
learning with SGDM
9-class: Adipose, Background,
Debris,
Lymphocyte aggregates,
Mucus, Muscle, Normal
mucosa, Stroma, Tumor
epithelium
TCGA-COAD (461 patients),
TCGA-READ (172 patients)
Same as Kather et al., 2019
Pearson r (for TSR evaluation
between CNN and
pathologists): 0.939 ICC
Mean difference in TSR
evaluation between CNN and
pathologists: 0.01
Stroma-high vs. stroma-low
patients HR (OS): 1.72
(discovery cohort) and 2.08
(validation study)
Cao
[103] Theranostics MSI prediction
An ensemble pipeline for the
likelihood of each patch,
which is extracted from
ResNet-18
Binary (MSI/MSS)
TCGA (429 frozen slides),
Tongshu Biotechnology Co.
(785 FFPE slides)
(a) TCGA-COAD test set:
AUC 0.8848
(b) External Validation set:
AUC 0.8504

Diagnostics 2022, 12, 837 17 of 32
Table 1. Cont.
Year First Author Journal Aim of Medical
Research Technical Method Classiﬁcation
Details Dataset Performance Metrics
Xu
[39] J Pathol Inform Diagnosis Inception v3 pre-trained
on ImageNet Binary (normal/cancer) St. Paul’s Hospital,
307 H/E images
Median ACC: 99.9% (normal
slides), median ACC: 94.8%
(cancer slides)
Independent dataset:
median ACC: 88.1%,
AUROC 0.99
Jang
[77]
World J
Gastroenterol
Prediction of IHC
biomarkers
(A) Simple CNN architecture
for the initial binary problem
(B) Inception.v3 for the main
classiﬁcation problem
A) Binary (tissue/no-tissue),
B) Binary (normal/tumor), C)
Binary (APC, KRAS, PIK3CA,
SMAD4, TP53)
wild-type/mutation
TCGA
629 WSIs (frozen tissue
sections 7 FFPE)
Seoul St. Mary Hospital
(SMH) 142 WSIs
Frozen WSIs: AUC
0.693–0.809
FFPE WSIs: 0.645–0.783
Medela
[113] J Pathol Inform Tumor tissue
classiﬁcation
The authors proposed several
different functions.
For the evaluation, a ResNet
backbone was employed, with
modiﬁed last layer
8-class: tumor epithelium,
simple stroma, complex
stroma, immune cells, debris
and mucus, mucosal glands,
adipose tissue, background
University Medical Center
Mannheim, 5.000 H/E images
With K = 3: BAC: 85.0 ± 0.6
Silhouette: 0.37 ± 0.02
Davis–Bouldin: 1.41 ± 0.08
With K = 5: BAC: 84.4 ± 0.8
Silhouette: 0.37 ± 0.02
Davis–Bouldin: 1.43 ± 0.09
With K = 7: BAC: 84.5 ± 0.3
Silhouette: 0.37 ± 0.02
Davis–Bouldin: 1.43 ± 0.09
Skrede
[93] Lancet Survival
An ensemble approach with
ten different CNN models
based on DoMorev1
3-class (good/poor
prognosis/uncertain) >12.000.000 image tiles
Uncertain vs. good prognosis
HR: 1.89 unadjusted and
1.56 adjusted
Poor vs. good prognosis HR:
3.84 unadjusted and
3.04 adjusted
Comparison of 3-year
cancer-SP: survival of the
good prognosis group to the
uncertain and poor prognosis
groups: SE: 52%, SP: 78%,
PDV:19%, NPV: 94%,
ACC: 76%
Comparison of 3-year cancer-
SP: survival of the good and
uncertain prognosis groups
with the poor prognosis group:
SE: 69%, SP: 66%, PDV: 17%,
NPV: 96%, ACC: 67%,
AUC: 0.713
2021
Sirinukunwattana
[109] Gut
Consensus molecular
subtypes (CMSs)
prediction
Inception v3, as well as
adversarial learning
4-class: CMS1, CMS2, CMS3,
CMS4
(1) FOCUS 510 H/E slides, (2)
TCGA 431 H/E slides,
(3) GRAMPIAN 265 H/E
slides Total: 1.206 slides
(1) AUC 0.88, (2) AUC 0.81,
(3) AUC 0.82

Diagnostics 2022, 12, 837 18 of 32
Table 1. Cont.
Year First Author Journal Aim of Medical
Research Technical Method Classiﬁcation
Details Dataset Performance Metrics
Yamashita
[104] Lancet Oncol MSI prediction
2-stage novel architecture
based on a modiﬁed
MobileNetV2 architecture
pre-trained on ImageNet and
ﬁne-tuned by transfer learning
on the Stanford-CRC
dataset
(1) 7-classes: adipose tissue,
necrotic debris,
lymphocytes, mucin, stroma
or smooth muscle, normal
colorectal epithelium, and
colorectal ADC epithelium
(2) Binary (MSI/MSS)
Stanford-CRC dataset
(internal): 66,578 tiles from
100 WSIs
TCGA (external): 287,543 tiles
from 484 WSIs
Internal: AUROC 0.931,
External: AUROC 0.779
NPV:93.7%, SE:76.0%,
SP:66.6%
Reader study
Model AUROC 0.865
Pathologist AUROC 0.605
Zhou
[37]
Comput Med
Imaging Graph
Tumor tissue
classiﬁcation
A novel 3-framework based
on ResNet. Each framework
employs different CNN for
(a) Image-level binary
classiﬁcation (CA/NC),
(b) Cell-level providing the
cancer probability in heatmap,
(c) Combination framework
which merges the output of
the previous ones
Binary (cancer/normal)
TCGA 1346 H/E WSIs, First
Afﬁliated Hospital of Zhejiang
University, First Afﬁliated
Hospital of Soochow
University, Nanjing First
Hospital 50 slides
ACC: 0.946
Precision: 0.9636
Recall: 0.9815
F1 score: 0.9725
Masud
[49] Sensors Diagnosis
Custom simple CNN
architecture with 3 CL, two
max pooling 1 batch
normalization and 1 dropout
Binary
(Colon ADC/colon benign)
LC25000 dataset, James A.
Haley Veterans’ Hospital,
5.000 images of Colon ADC,
5.000 images of Colon Benign
Tissue
Peak classiﬁcation ACC:
96.33%
F-measure score 96.38% for
colon and lung cancer
identiﬁcation
Kwak
[88] Front Oncol Lymph Node Metastasis
(LNM) prediction
U-Net based architecture
without (no details)
7-class: normal colon mucosa,
stroma, lymphocytes, mucus,
adipose tissue, smooth muscle,
colon cancer epithelium
TCGA
1000.000 patches
LNM positive group/LNM
negative group: OR = 26.654
(PTS score)
Ability of PTS score to identify
LNM in colon cancer:
AUC 0.677
Krause
[108] J Pathol MSI prediction
A conditional generative
adversarial network (CGAN)
for synthetic image generation
with 6-CL for both the
generator and discriminator
network, and a modiﬁed
ShufﬂeNet for classiﬁcation
Binary
(MSS/MSI)
TCGA (same as Kather
et al., 2019)
NLCS cohort (same as
Echle et al., 2020)
AUROC 0.742 (patient cohort
1), 0.757 (patient cohort 2),
0.743 (synthetic images), 0.777
(both patient cohorts and
synthetic images)

Diagnostics 2022, 12, 837 19 of 32
Table 1. Cont.
Year First Author Journal Aim of Medical
Research Technical Method Classiﬁcation
Details Dataset Performance Metrics
Pai
[72] Histopathology Tumor
microenvironment
CNN developed on the deep
learning platform (Aiforia
Technologies, Helsinki,
Finland)
(No details of architecture)
(A) 7-class: carcinoma, tumor
budding/poorly
differentiated clusters, stroma,
necrosis, mucin, smooth
muscle, fat
(B) 3-class: immature stroma,
mature stroma, inﬂammatory
stroma
(C) 3-class: low grade
carcinoma, high grade
carcinoma, signet ring cell
carcinoma (D) TILs
identiﬁcation
Stanford University Medical
Center (same as Ma
et al., 2019)
230 H/E TMAs
MMRD classifying SE: 88%
and SP: 73%
ICC between pathologists and
model for TB/PDCs, type of
stroma, carcinoma grade and
TILs: 0.56 to 0.88
Wang
[45] BMC Med Diagnosis
AI approach uses Inception.v3
CNN architecture
with weights initialized from
transfer learning
Binary
(cancer/not cancer)
14,234 CRC WSIs
and
170.099 patches
ACC: 98.11%, AUC 99.83%,
SP: 99.22%, SE: 96.99%
Riasatian
[112] Med Image Anal Tumor tissue
classiﬁcation
Proposed a novel architecture
(called KimiaNet) based on
the DenseNet
8-class: tumor epithelium,
simple stroma, complex
stroma, immune cells, debris,
normal mucosal glands,
adipose tissue, background
TCGA 5.000 patches ACC: 96.38% (KN-I) and
96.80% (KN-IV)
Jiao
[70]
Comput Methods
Programs Biomed
Tumor
microenvironment
(1) For the foreground, tissue
detection employs based on
U-NET (2) For 9-class
problem, employs the same
VGG-19 architecture as Kather
et al. and Jhao et al.
9-class: adipose tissue,
background, debris,
lymphocytes, mucus, smooth
muscle, normal colon mucosa,
cancer-associated stroma,
colorectal ADC epithelium
TCGA
441 H/E images
PFI
Stroma HR: 1.665
Necrosis HR: 1.552
Lymphocyte HR: 1.512
Nearchou
[73] Cancers
Classiﬁcation of
Desmoplastic
reaction (DR)
DenseNet neural network,
integrated within HALO®
Binary
(Immature/other DR type)
528 stage II and III CRC
patients treated at the
National Defense Medical
College Hospital, Japan
Classiﬁer’s performance:
Dice score: 0.87 for the
segmentation of myxoid
stroma (test set: 40 patient
samples)
Lee
[107] Int J Cancer MSI prediction
A framework of an initial
CNN architecture based on
binary classiﬁcation of
patches, followed by an
Inception.v3
(A) Binary (tissue/non-tissue)
(B) Binary (normal/tumor)
(C) Binary (MSS/MSI-H)
TCGA (COAD, READ) 1.336
frozen slides, 584 FFPE WSIs
Seoul St. Mary’s Hospital 125
MSS FFPE WSIs, 149 MSI-H
FFPE WSIs and 77 MSS
FFPE WSIs
TCGA dataset: AUC 0.892
SMH dataset: AUC 0.972
Wulczyn
[94] NPJ Digit Med Survival
(1) Tumor segmentation
model based on Inception v3,
(2) Prognostic model based on
Mobile net
Binary (tumor/not tumor)
27.300 slides
Validation dataset 1: 9.340
Validation dataset 2:7.140
Validation dataset 1: AUC 0.70
(95% CI: 0.66–0.73) Validation
dataset 2: 0.69 (95% CI:
0.64–0.72)

Diagnostics 2022, 12, 837 20 of 32
Table 1. Cont.
Year First Author Journal Aim of Medical
Research Technical Method Classiﬁcation
Details Dataset Performance Metrics
Shimada
[111] J Gastroenterol
Tumor mutational
burden (TMB)
prediction
Inception.v3
(A) Binary
(neoplastic/non-neoplastic)
(B) Binary
(TMB-High/TMB-Low)
Japanese cohort
TCGA
201 H/E images
AUC 0.910
Bian
[74] Cancers Prediction of IHC
biomarkers
(1) Modiﬁcation of
Inceptionv3 adding residual
block for cellular biomarker
distribution prediction and (2)
employs Shufﬂenet.v2, for
tumor gene mutation
detection
Binary (biomarkers prediction)
CD3/CD20, panCK, DAP
Binary (tumor mutation
genes) APC, TP53, KRAS
Peking University Cancer
Hospital and Institute (8697
H/E image patches),
TCGA-Colon ADC (COAD)
project (50,801 H/E image
patches)
Biomarker’s prediction:
ACC: 90.4%
Tumor gene mutation
detection: AUC = 0.76 (APC),
AUC = 0.77 (KRAS),
AUC = 0.79 (TP53)
Schiele
[100] Cancers Survival
InceptionResNet.v2 network,
pre-trained on images from
the ImageNet from Keras
Binary (low/high metastasis
risk)
University Hospital Augsburg
291 pT3 and pT4 CRC patients
AUC 0.842, SP: 79.5%, SE:
75.6%, ACC: 75.8%
Theodosi
[101] Microsc Res Tech Survival Pre-trained VGG-16 Binary (5-year
survivors/non-survivors)
University Hospital of Patras
162 IHC AIB1 images
ML system: Mean Overall
Classiﬁcation ACC: 87%
DL system: Classiﬁcation
ACC: 97%
Wang
[105] Bioinformatics MSI prediction
A platform for automated
classiﬁcation where each user
can deﬁne his own problem.
Different popular
architectures have been
embedded (Inception-V3,
ResNet50, Vgg19,
MobileNetV2, ShufﬂeNetV2,
and MNASNET)
Binary (MSI/MSS) TCGA and WSIs mean ROC (AUC
0.647 ± 0.029)
Khened
[115] Sci Rep
Slide Image
Segmentation and
Analysis
A novel ensemble CNN
framework with three
pre-trained architectures:
(a) U-net with DenceNet as
the backbone, (b) U-Net with
Inception-ResNet.v2
(Inception.v4), (c)
Deeplabv3Plus with Xception
(1) Camelyon16: Binary
(normal/metastasis), (2)
Camelyon17: 4-class:
(negative, ITC, Micro and
Macro)
DigestPath 660 H/E images
(250 with lesions, 410 with no
lesions)
Dice: 0.782
Chuang
[91] Mod Pathol
Detection of nodal
micro- and
macro-metastasis
ResNet-50
3-class: Micrometasta-
sis/Macrometastasis/Isolated
tumor cells
Department of Pathology,
Chang Gung Memorial
Hospital in Linkou, Taiwan,
3182 H/E WSIs
Slides with >1 lymph node:
Macromatastasis: AUC 0.9993,
Micrometastasis: AUC 0.9956
Slides with a single lymph
node: Macromatastasis: AUC
0.9944, Micrometastasis: AUC
0.9476 Algorithm ACC:
98.50% (95% CI: 97.75–99.25%)

Diagnostics 2022, 12, 837 21 of 32
Table 1. Cont.
Year First Author Journal Aim of Medical
Research Technical Method Classiﬁcation
Details Dataset Performance Metrics
Jones
[96] Histopathology Survival No details for DL
7-class: background, necrosis,
epithelium, desmoplastic
stroma, inﬂamed stroma,
mucin, non-neoplastic
mesenchymal components of
bowel wall
Oxford Transanal Endoscopic
Microsurgery (TEM) database
H/E FFPE
150 patients
For desmoplastic to inﬂamed
stroma ratio:
AUC: 0.71, SE: 0.92, SP: 0.50,
PPV: 0.30, NPV: 0.97
For stroma to immune ratio:
AUC: 0.64, SE: 0.92, SP: 0.45,
PPV: 0.27, NPV: 0.96
Pham
[71] Sci Rep Tumor tissue
classiﬁcation
Time-frequency, time-space,
long short-term memory
(LSTM) networks
(1) binary (stroma/tumor), (2)
8-class: tumor, simple stroma,
complex stroma, immune cells
(lymphoid), debris, normal
mucosal glands (mucosa),
adipose tissue, background
Colorectal cancer data:
University Medical Center
Mannheim, 625
non-overlapping for each 8
types of tissue images, total
5000 tissue images
(1) ACC: 100, SE: 100, SP: 100,
Precision: 100,
F1-score: 1
(2) ACC: 99.96%
Sarker
[82] Cancers Prediction of IHC
biomarker
U-net architecture with, in
total, 23 convolutional layers
Binary (ICOS-positive
cell/background)
Northern Ireland Biobank
(same as Gray et al., 2017)
U-net highest performance:
ACC: 98.93%, Dice: 68.84%,
AJI = 53.92%
(Backbone: ResNet101,
optimizer: Adam, loss
function: BCE, batch size: 8)
Ben Hamida
[61] Comput Biol Med Tumor tissue
classiﬁcation
(1) Comparison of 4 different
architectures Alexnet, VGG-16,
ResNet, DenseNet,
Inceptionv3, with transfer
learning strategy
(2) Comparison of SegNet and
U-Net for semantic
Segmentation
(A) 8-class: tumor, stroma,
tissue, necrosis, immune, fat,
background, trash
(B) Binary (tumor/no-tumor)
(1) AiCOLO (396 H/E slides),
(2) NCT Biobank, University
Medical Center Mannheim
(100.000 H/E patches), (3)
CRC-5000 dataset (5.000
images), (4) Warwick (16 H/E)
(1) ResNet
On AiCOLO-8: overall
ACC: 96.98%
On CRC-5000: ACC: 96.77%
On NCT-CRC-HE-100κ:
ACC: 99.76%
On merged: ACC: 99.98%
(2) On AiCOLO-2
UNet: ACC: 76.18%, SegNet:
ACC:81.22%
Gupta
[36] Diagnostics Tumor tissue
classiﬁcation
(a) VGG, ResNet, Inception,
and IR-v2 for transfer
learning, (b) Five types of
customized architectures
based on Inception-ResNet-v2
Binary (normal/abnormal)
Chang Cung Memorial
Hospital, 215 H/E WSIs,
1.303.012 patches
(a) IR-v2 performed better
than the others: AUC 0.97,
F-score: 0.97
(b) IR-v2 Type 5: AUC 0.99,
F-score: 0.99
Terradillos
[51] J Pathol Inform Diagnosis
Two-class classiﬁer based on
the Xception model
architecture
Binary (benign/malignant) Basurto University Hospital
14.712 images
SE: 0.8228 ± 0.1575
SP: 0.9114 ± 0.0814

Diagnostics 2022, 12, 837 22 of 32
Table 1. Cont.
Year First Author Journal Aim of Medical
Research Technical Method Classiﬁcation
Details Dataset Performance Metrics
Paladini
[59] J Imaging Tumor tissue
classiﬁcation
2 × Ensemble approach
ResNet-101, ResNeXt-50,
Inception-v3 and DensNet-161.
(1) Mean-Ensemble-CNN
approach, the predicted class
of each image is assigned
using the average of the
predicted probabilities of four
trained models.
(2) In the NN-Ensemble-CNN
approach, the deep features
corresponding to the last FC
layer are extracted from the
four trained models
1st database: 8-class (tumor
epithelium, simple stroma,
complex stroma, immune
cells, debris, normal glands,
adipose tissue, background)
2nd database: 7-class (tumor,
complex stroma, stroma,
smooth muscle, benign,
inﬂammatory, debris)
Kather-CRC-2016 Database
(5000 CRC images) and
CRC-TP Database (280,000
CRC images)
Kather-CRC-2016 Database:
Mean-Ensemble-CNN mean
ACC: 96.16%
NN-Ensemble-CNN mean
ACC: 96.14%
CRC-TP Database:
Mean-Ensemble-CNN
ACC: 86.97%
Mean-Ensemble-CNN
F1-Score: 86.99%
NN-Ensemble-CNN
ACC: 87.26%
NN-Ensemble-CNN
F1-Score: 87.27%
Nguyen
[110] Mod Pathol
Consensus molecular
subtypes (CMSs)
prediction
A system for tissue detection
in WSIs based on an ensemble
learning method with two
raters, VGG and CapsuleNet
Mucin-to-tumor area ratio
quantiﬁcation and binary
classiﬁcation: high/low
mucin tumor
TCGA (871 slides)
Bern (775 slides)
The Cancer Imaging Archive
(TCIA) (373 images)
ICC between pathologists and
model for mucin-to-tumor
area ratio score: 0.92
To˘ gaçar
[48] Comput Biol Med Diagnosis
DarkNet-19 model based on
the YOLO object detection
model
Binary
(benign/colon ADC) 10.000 images
Colon ADC: ACC: 99.96%
Colon benign: ACC: 99.96%
Overall ACC: 99.69%
Zhao
[95]
Cancer Immunol
Immunother
Lymph Node Metastasis
(LNM) prediction
Same CNN as Zhao et al., 2020
(VGG-19 pre-trained on the
ImageNet using transfer
learning with SGDM)
7-class: tumor epithelium,
stroma, mucus, debris, normal
mucosa, smooth muscle,
lymphocytes, adipose
Training 279 H/E WSIs and
Validation 194 H/E WSIs
High CLR density OS in the
discovery cohort
HR: 0.58 High CLR density OS
in the validation cohort
HR: 0.45
Kiehl
[89] EJC Lymph Node Metastasis
(LNM) prediction
ResNet18 pre-trained
on H&E-stained slides of the
CAMELYON16 challenge
Binary (LNM positive/LNM
negative)
DACHS cohort (2,431 patients)
TCGA (582 patients)
AUROC on the internal test
set: 71%
AUROC on the TCGA
set: 61.2%
Xu
[76] Caner Cell Int
Quantiﬁcation of
tumor–stroma ratio
(TSR) for prognosis
VGG-19 with or w/o transfer
learning
9-class: adipose, background,
debris, lymphocytes,
mucus, muscle, normal
mucosa, stroma, tumor
epithelium
283.000 H/E tiles, 154.400 IHC
tiles from 243 slides from 121
patients, 22.500 IHC tiles from
114 slides from 57 patients
Test dataset: ACC 0.973, 95%
CI 0.971–0.975
Yu
[47] Nat Commun Diagnosis No details for deep learning Binary (cancer/not cancer) 13.111 WSIs, 62,919 patches
Patch-level diagnosis
AUC: 0.980 ± 0.014
Patient-level diagnosis
AUC: 0.974 ± 0.013
Jiao
[60]
Comput Methods
Programs Biomed
Tumor tissue
classiﬁcation
Deep embedding-based
logistic regression (DELR),
using active learning for
sample selection strategy
8-class: adipose, debris,
lymphocytes, mucus,
smooth muscle, normal
mucosa, stroma, tumor
epithelium
180.082 patches AUC: >0.95

Diagnostics 2022, 12, 837 23 of 32
Table 1. Cont.
Year First Author Journal Aim of Medical
Research Technical Method Classiﬁcation
Details Dataset Performance Metrics
Brockmoeller
[90] J Pathol
Lymph Nodes
Metastasis (LNM)
prediction
ShufﬂeNet with transfer
learning for
end-to-end prediction
(A) Prediction: Any Lymph
Node Metastasis (B) >1 lymph
node positive
Køge/Roskilde and Slagelse
Hospitals/pT2 cohort (311
H/E sections) Retrospective
Danish Study/pT1 cohort (203
H/E sections)
pT1 CRC
>1 LNM AUROC: 0.733
Any LNM AUROC: 0.567
pT2 CRC
>1 LNM AUROC: 0.733
Any LNM AUROC: 0.711
Mittal
[40] Cancers Diagnosis Custom architecture with 12
CN and 3 FC Binary (cancer/normal) 15 TMAs ACC:98%, SP: 98.6%,
SE: 98.2%
Kim
[114] Sci Rep Tumor tissue
classiﬁcation
Combination of
InceptionResNet.v2 with PCA
and Wavelet transform
5-class: ADC, high-grade
adenoma with dysplasia,
low-grade adenoma with
dysplasia, carcinoid,
hyperplastic polyp
Yeouido St. Mary’s Hospital
390 WSIs
Dice: 0.804 ± 0.125
ACC: 0.957 ± 0.025
Jac: 0.690 ± 0.174
Tsuneki
[62] Diagnostics Tumor tissue
classiﬁcation
The authors use the
EfﬁcientNetB1 model starting
with pre-trained weights on
ImageNet
4-class: poorly differentiated
ADC, well-to-moderately
ADC, adenoma,
non-neoplastic)
1.799 H/E WSIs AUC 0.95
Bustos
[106] Biomolecules
Tumor tissue
classiﬁcation/MSI
prediction
Resnet-34 pre-trained on
ImageNet
(A) 9-class: adipose,
background, debris,
lymphocytes, mucus, smooth
muscle, normal colon
epithelium, cancer-associated
stroma, colorectal ADC
epithelium
(B) Binary (MSI-H/MSS)
72 TMAs (A) Validation test: AUC 0.98
(B) MSI AUC 0.87 ± 0.03
Bilal
[78] Lancet Digit Health
Prediction of molecular
pathways and
mutations
2 × pre-trained models (1)
ResNet-18, (2) adaptive
ResNet-34
Binary:
(1) High/low mutation
density
(2) MSI/MSS
(3) Chromosomal instability
(CIN)/Genomic stability
(4) CIMP-high/CIMP-low
(5) BRAFmut/BRAFWT
(6) TP53mut/TP53WT
(7) KRASmut/KRASWT
TCGA (502 slides) Pathology
Artiﬁcial Intelligence Platform
(PAIP) challenge—47 slides
(12 microsatellite instable and
35 microsatellite stable)
Mean AUROC
Hypermutation: (0.81 [SD
0.03] vs. 0.71),
MSI (0.86 [0.04] vs. 0.74),
CIN (0.83 [0.02] vs. 0.73),
BRAF mutation (0.79 [0.01]
vs. 0.66),
TP53mut (0.73 [0.02] vs. 0.64),
KRAS mutation (0.60 [SD 0.04]
vs. 0.60),
CIMP-high status 0.79
(SD 0.05)

Diagnostics 2022, 12, 837 24 of 32
Table 1. Cont.
Year First Author Journal Aim of Medical
Research Technical Method Classiﬁcation
Details Dataset Performance Metrics
Nguyen
[42] Sci Rep Diagnosis
Same approach with Nquyen
et al., 2021, presented in
Mod Pathol
3-class:
Tumor/Normal/Other tissue 54 TMA slides
SVEVC:
Tumor: Recall:0.938,
Precision:0.976, F1-score:
0.957, ACC: 0.939
Normal: Recall: 0.864,
Precision: 0.873, F1-score:
0.915, ACC: 0.982
Other tissue: Recall: 0.964,
Precision: 0.772, F1-score:
0.858, ACC: 0.947
Overall (average): Recall:
0.922, Precision: 0.907,
F1-score: 0.910, ACC: 0.956
Shen
[46]
IEEE/ACM Trans
Comput Biol
Bioinform
Diagnosis
A DenseNet based
architecture of CNN, in an
overall framework which
employs a Monte Carlo
adaptively sampling to
localize patches
3-class: loose non-tumor
tissue/dense non-tumor
tissue/gastrointestinal
cancer tissues
(i) TCGA-STAD 432 samples
(ii) TCGA-COAD 460 samples
(iii) TCGA-READ 171 samples
DP-FTD: AUC 0.779, FROC
0.817 DCRF-FTD: AUC 0.786,
FROC 0.821
2022
Schrammen
[79] J Pathol Diagnosis/Prediction of
IHC biomarkers
Novel method called
Slide-Level Assessment Model
(SLAM), uses an end-to-end
neural network based on
ShufﬂeNet
3-class: Positive tumor slides,
Negative tumor slides,
Non-tumor slides (A) Binary:
BRAF status
(mutated or non-mutated)
(B) Binary (MSI/MMR)
(C) Binary: High grade (grade
3–4)/Low grade (grade 1–2)
(A) Darmkrebs: Chancen
der Verhütung durch
Screening (DACHS) 2.448
H/E slides B) Yorkshire
Cancer Research Bowel
Cancer Improvement Program
(YCR-BCIP) 889 H/E slides
DACHS cohort
Tumor detection
AUROC: 0.980
Tumor grading AUROC: 0.751
MSI/MMRD or MSS/MMRP
AUROC: 0.909
BRAF status detection
AUROC: 0.821
YCR-BCIP cohort
MSI/MMRD status detection
AUROC: 0.900
Hosseinzadeh Kassani
[43] Int J Med Inform Diagnosis
A comparative study between
popular architectures (ResNet,
VGG, MobileNet, Inceptionv3,
InceptionResnetv2, ResNeXt,
SE-ResNet, SE-ResNeXt)
Binary (Cancerous/
Healthy regions)
DigestPath, 250 H/E WSIs,
1.746 patches
Dice: 82.74% ± 1.77
ACC: 87.07% ± 1.56
F1 score: 82.79% ± 1.79
Deshpande
[116] Med Image Anal Diagnosis
Novel GAN architecture,
called SAFRON, including
loss function which enables
generation of images of
arbitrarily large sizes after
training on relatively small
image patches
Binary (benign/malignant)
(A) CRAG (Graham et al.,
2019, Awan et al., 2017) 213
colorectal tissue images (B)
DigestPath 46 images
ResNet model median
classiﬁcation ACC: 97% with
generated images added to the
Baseline set, and 93% without
ADC: Adenocarcinoma, ACC: Accuracy, AUC: Area under the ROC Curve, CNN: Convolutional Neural Network, IHC: Immunohistochemistry, SE: Sensitivity, SP: Speciﬁcity, TCGA: The
Cancer Genome Atlas, SVM: Support Vector Machine, CL: Convolutional layers, FC: Fully-Connected (output) layer, CRC: Colorectal Cancer, TMA: Tissue microarray, WSIs: Whole-slide
images, H/E: Hematoxylin and Eosin, MSI: Microsatellite Instability, MMR: Mismatch Repair, MSS: Microsatellite Stable, KRAS: Kirsten rat sarcoma virus, CIN: Chromosomal instability,
TP53: Tumor Protein 53, ICOS: Inducible T-cell COStimulator, APC: Adenomatous Polyposis, PIK3CA: Phosphatidylinositol-4,5-Bisphosphate 3-Kinase Catalytic Subunit Alpha.

Diagnostics 2022, 12, 837 25 of 32
4. Discussion
A pathology diagnosis focuses on the macroscopic and microscopic examination of hu-
man tissues, with the light microscope being the valuable tool for almost two centuries [11].
A meticulous microscopic examination of tissue biopsies is the cornerstone of diagnosis
and is a time-consuming procedure. An accurate diagnosis is only the ﬁrst step for pa-
tient treatment. It needs to be complimented with information about grade, stage, and
other prognostic and predictive factors [4]. Pathologists’ interpretations of tissue lesions
become data, guiding decisions for patients’ management. A meaningful interpretation
is the ultimate challenge. In certain ﬁelds, inter- and intra-observer variability are not
uncommon [12,13]. In such cases, the interpretation of the visual image can be assisted
by objective outputs. Many data have been published over the last 5 years exploring the
possibility of moving on to computer-aided diagnosis and the measurement of prognostic
and predictive markers for optimal personalized medicine [ 117,118]. Furthermore, the
implementation of AI is now on the horizon. In the last 5 years, extensive research has
been conducted to implement AI-based models for the diagnosis of multiple cancer types
and, in particular, CRC [ 14,15,119]. The important aspects in a CRC diagnosis, such as
histological type, grade, stromal reaction, immunohistochemical and molecular features
have been addressed using breakthrough technologies.
The traditional pathology methods are accompanied by great advantages [120]. The
analytical procedures in pathology laboratories are cost-effective and, during recent years,
have become automated, eliminating the time and errors of procedures, while maintain-
ing high levels of sensitivity and speciﬁcity of techniques, such as IHC [ 119]. Despite
the widespread availability, challenges and limitations of traditional pathology methods
remain, such as the differences between laboratories’ protocols and techniques, as well
as the subjective interpretation between pathologists, resulting in inconsistency in diag-
noses [12,13]. Novel imaging systems and WSI scanners promise to upgrade traditional
pathology, preserving the code and ethics of practice [119]. The potential of DL algorithms
is expanding all over the ﬁelds in histopathology. In clinical practice, such algorithms could
provide valuable information about the tumor microenvironment quantitative analysis
of histological features [ 76]. Better patient stratiﬁcation for targeted therapies could be
approached by DL-based models predicting mutations, such as MSI status [ 77,78,107].
More than ever, AI could be of great importance for a pathologist in daily clinical practice.
AI is consistently supported by extensive research, which is followed by good perfor-
mance metrics and potential. Several studies have shown that many DL-based models’
predictions did not differ in terms of statistical signiﬁcance when compared to pathologists’
predictions [45,104]. Thus, DL algorithms could provide valuable results for diagnoses in
clinical practice, especially when inconsistencies occur. The available scanned histological
images can be reviewed and examined by the collaboration of pathologists simultaneously,
from different locations [ 121,122]. For an efﬁcient fully digital workﬂow, however, the
development of technology infrastructure, including computers, scanners, workstations
and medical displays is necessary.
Summarizing the presented DL studies from the medical point of view, 17 studies
focus on diagnosis, classifying the images as cancer/not cancer, benign/colon ADC or
benign/malignant, 17 studies classify tumor tissues, 19 studies investigate the microenvi-
ronment of tumors, 14 studies extract histological features related to prognosis, metastasis
and survival, and ﬁnally, 10 studies detect the microsatellite instability status. The remain-
ing 5 studies that were not described mainly concerned the technical aspects of DL in
histological images of CRC. Summarizing the presented DL works from the technical point
of view, 80 studies are applications of CNNs, either for image segmentation or classiﬁcation,
and 2 studies employ GANs for the simulation of histological images. The unbalanced
distribution between CNN-based and GAN-based studies is an expected result due to the
objectives of these two deep learning approaches. CNNs directly classify the images into
different categories (e.g., cancer/not cancer). In contrast, GANs just improve the dataset to
avoid overtraining and overﬁtting during the training procedure, without dealing directly

Diagnostics 2022, 12, 837 26 of 32
with the main medical question. From the CNN-based studies, 10 studies proposed a
custom CNN architecture, which was developed from scratch, 42 studies employed already
developed architectures, often using transfer learning, and ﬁnally, 26 studies implemented
novel architectures, such as (a) the modiﬁcation of those already developed (5 studies),
(b) a combination between CNNs or CNNs with other AI techniques (15 studies) and
(c) ensemble methods (6 Studies). Finally, two (2) of the studies did not provide any detail
about the DL approach.
The application of DL methods in the diagnosis of CRC over the last 5-years seems
to be evolving rapidly, faster than other ﬁelds of histopathology. However, it seems that
there is an expected gradual evolution, starting from the simple techniques of CNNs,
then employing transfer learning to the networks, and ﬁnally attempting to develop new
architectures, focusing on the requirements of the medical question. Additionally, in the
last two years, alternative deep learning techniques such as GANs have started to be used.
The contribution of such methods will be signiﬁcant, since DL requires a sufﬁcient size of
the training set to perform well and provide generalization. Large data sets may not always
be available from the annotations of pathologists and, therefore, need to be enriched with a
simulated training set.
It is expected that CNN’s application directly in histopathological images will present
a better performance compared to traditional techniques. CNNs are advantageous over
traditional image processing techniques due to the training procedure, while they are also
more robust than the traditional AI techniques because they automatically extract features
from the image. In this systematic review, different studies use a variety of performance
metrics, while the natures of each classiﬁcation problem are also different to each other.
Therefore, it is not meaningful to calculate the average performance value for all the studies.
For this reason, only the accuracy (Acc) and area under the curve (AUC), which were
used more than the other metrics, have been used to evaluate each different classiﬁcation
problem. The mean value and Standard Error of Mean have been computed for binary
classiﬁcation problems (Acc = 94.11% ± 1.3%, AUC = 0.852 ± 0.066), 3-class classiﬁcation
problems (Acc = 95.5% ± 1.7%, AUC = 0.931 ± 0.051), and ﬁnally 8-class classiﬁcation
problems (Acc = 94.4% ± 2.0%, AUC = 0.972 ± 0.022), which provides sufﬁcient samples of
these metrics. The above performance values conﬁrm that DL in colorectal histopathological
images can achieve a reliable prediction.
5. Conclusions
When dealing with human disease, particularly cancer, we need in our armamentar-
ium all available resources, and AI is promising to deliver valuable guidance. Speciﬁcally
for CRC, it appears that the recent exponentially growing relevant research will soon trans-
form the ﬁeld of tissue-based diagnoses. Preliminary results demonstrate that AI-based
models are further applied in clinical cancer research, including CRC, and breast and lung
cancer. However, to overcome several limitations, larger numbers of datasets, quality image
annotations, as well as external validation cohorts are required to establish the diagnostic
accuracy of DL models in clinical practice. Given the available collected data, a part of
the current systematic review could be extended to meta-analysis, especially utilizing the
data from retrospective studies and survival analysis. The latter could provide us with a
comprehensive status for the contribution of DL methods to the diagnosis of CRC.
Author Contributions: Conceptualization, N.G., A.T.T. and A.B.; data curation, A.D., E.B. and T.K.;
funding acquisition, N.G. and A.T.T.; methodology, G.N. and A.B.; supervision, N.G., A.T.T. and A.B.;
visualization, N.G.; writing—original draft preparation, A.D., E.B., T.K. and N.G.; writing—review
and editing, A.D., E.B., T.K., G.N. and A.B. All authors have read and agreed to the published version
of the manuscript.
Funding: This research has been co-ﬁnanced by the European Union and Greek national funds
through the Operational Program Competitiveness, Entrepreneurship and Innovation, under the call
RESEARCH-CREATE-INNOVATE: T2EDK-03660 (Project: Deep in Biopsies).

Diagnostics 2022, 12, 837 27 of 32
Institutional Review Board Statement: Not applicable.
Acknowledgments: Athena Davri is supported by Greece and the European Union—European
Regional Development Fund (ERDF) under the Operational Program “Competitiveness Entrepreneur-
ship Innovation” (EPAnEK), NSRF 2014-2020 (MIS 5047236).
Conﬂicts of Interest: The authors declare no conﬂict of interest.
References
1. Sung, H.; Ferlay, J.; Siegel, R.L.; Laversanne, M.; Soerjomataram, I.; Jemal, A.; Bray, F. Global Cancer Statistics 2020: GLOBOCAN
Estimates of Incidence and Mortality Worldwide for 36 Cancers in 185 Countries. CA Cancer J. Clin. 2021, 71, 209–249. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
2. Douaiher, J.; Ravipati, A.; Grams, B.; Chowdhury, S.; Alatise, O.; Are, C. Colorectal Cancer-Global Burden, Trends, and
Geographical Variations. J. Surg. Oncol. 2017, 115, 619–630. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
3. Sawicki, T.; Ruszkowska, M.; Danielewicz, A.; Nied´ zwiedzka, E.; Arłukowicz, T.; Przybyłowicz, K.E. A Review of Colorectal
Cancer in Terms of Epidemiology, Risk Factors, Development, Symptoms and Diagnosis. Cancers 2021, 13, 2025. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
4. Müller, M.F.; Ibrahim, A.E.K.; Arends, M.J. Molecular Pathological Classiﬁcation of Colorectal Cancer. Virchows Arch. 2016,
469, 125–134. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
5. Marzouk, O.; Schoﬁeld, J. Review of Histopathological and Molecular Prognostic Features in Colorectal Cancer. Cancers
2011, 3, 2767–2810. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
6. Jass, J.R. Classiﬁcation of Colorectal Cancer Based on Correlation of Clinical, Morphological and Molecular Features.Histopathology
2007, 50, 113–130. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
7. Sideris, M.; Papagrigoriadis, S. Molecular Biomarkers and Classiﬁcation Models in the Evaluation of the Prognosis of Colorectal
Cancer. Anticancer Res. 2014, 34, 2061–2068. [PubMed]
8. Pallag, A.; Ro¸ sca, E.; ¸ Ti¸ t, D.M.; Mu¸ tiu, G.; Bungău, S.G.; Pop, O.L. Monitoring the Effects of Treatment in Colon Cancer Cells
Using Immunohistochemical and Histoenzymatic Techniques. Rom. J. Morphol. Embryol. 2015, 56, 1103–1109. [PubMed]
9. Vogel, J.D.; Eskicioglu, C.; Weiser, M.R.; Feingold, D.L.; Steele, S.R. The American Society of Colon and Rectal Surgeons Clinical
Practice Guidelines for the Treatment of Colon Cancer. Dis. Colon Rectum 2017, 60, 999–1017. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
10. Kelly, M.; Soles, R.; Garcia, E.; Kundu, I. Job Stress, Burnout, Work-Life Balance, Well-Being, and Job Satisfaction among Pathology
Residents and Fellows. Am. J. Clin. Pathol. 2020, 153, 449–469. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
11. Pena, G.P .; Andrade-Filho, J.S. How Does a Pathologist Make a Diagnosis?Arch. Pathol. Lab. Med. 2009, 133, 124–132. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
12. van Putten, P .G.; Hol, L.; van Dekken, H.; Han van Krieken, J.; van Ballegooijen, M.; Kuipers, E.J.; van Leerdam, M.E. Inter-
Observer Variation in the Histological Diagnosis of Polyps in Colorectal Cancer Screening. Histopathology 2011, 58, 974–981.
[CrossRef]
13. Smits, L.J.H.; Vink-Börger, E.; Lijnschoten, G.; Focke-Snieders, I.; Post, R.S.; Tuynman, J.B.; Grieken, N.C.T.; Nagtegaal, I.D.
Diagnostic Variability in the Histopathological Assessment of Advanced Colorectal Adenomas and Early Colorectal Cancer in a
Screening Population. Histopathology 2022, 80, 790–798. [CrossRef]
14. Huang, S.; Yang, J.; Fong, S.; Zhao, Q. Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Cancer Diagnosis and Prognosis: Opportunities and Challenges.
Cancer Lett. 2020, 471, 61–71. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
15. Thakur, N.; Yoon, H.; Chong, Y. Current Trends of Artiﬁcial Intelligence for Colorectal Cancer Pathology Image Analysis: A
Systematic Review. Cancers 2020, 12, 1884. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
16. WHO Classiﬁcation of Tumours Editorial Board. WHO Classiﬁcation of Tumors: Digestive System Tumours, 5th ed.; International
Agency for Research on Cancer: Lyon, France, 2019; ISBN 978-92-832-4499-8.
17. Vilar, E.; Gruber, S.B. Microsatellite Instability in Colorectal Cancer—the Stable Evidence. Nat. Rev. Clin. Oncol. 2010, 7, 153–162.
[CrossRef]
18. Nojadeh, J.N.; Behrouz Sharif, S.; Sakhinia, E. Microsatellite Instability in Colorectal Cancer.EXCLI J. 2018, 17, 159–168. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
19. Tamura, K.; Kaneda, M.; Futagawa, M.; Takeshita, M.; Kim, S.; Nakama, M.; Kawashita, N.; Tatsumi-Miyajima, J. Genetic and
Genomic Basis of the Mismatch Repair System Involved in Lynch Syndrome. Int. J. Clin. Oncol. 2019, 24, 999–1011. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
20. Boland, C.R.; Goel, A. Microsatellite Instability in Colorectal Cancer. Gastroenterology 2010, 138, 2073–2087.e3. [CrossRef]
21. Kang, S.; Na, Y.; Joung, S.Y.; Lee, S.I.; Oh, S.C.; Min, B.W. The Signiﬁcance of Microsatellite Instability in Colorectal Cancer after
Controlling for Clinicopathological Factors. Medicine 2018, 97, e0019. [CrossRef]
22. Arjmand, A.; Tsipouras, M.G.; Tzallas, A.T.; Forlano, R.; Manousou, P .; Giannakeas, N. Quantiﬁcation of Liver Fibrosis—A
Comparative Study. Appl. Sci. 2020, 10, 447. [CrossRef]
23. Aeffner, F.; Zarella, M.; Buchbinder, N.; Bui, M.; Goodman, M.; Hartman, D.; Lujan, G.; Molani, M.; Parwani, A.; Lillard, K.; et al.
Introduction to Digital Image Analysis in Whole-Slide Imaging: A White Paper from the Digital Pathology Association. J. Pathol.
Inform. 2019, 10, 9. [CrossRef]

Diagnostics 2022, 12, 837 28 of 32
24. Patel, A.; Balis, U.G.J.; Cheng, J.; Li, Z.; Lujan, G.; McClintock, D.S.; Pantanowitz, L.; Parwani, A. Contemporary Whole Slide
Imaging Devices and Their Applications within the Modern Pathology Department: A Selected Hardware Review. J. Pathol.
Inform. 2021, 12, 50. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
25. Jirik, M.; Gruber, I.; Moulisova, V .; Schindler, C.; Cervenkova, L.; Palek, R.; Rosendorf, J.; Arlt, J.; Bolek, L.; Dejmek, J.; et al.
Semantic Segmentation of Intralobular and Extralobular Tissue from Liver Scaffold H&E Images.Sensors 2020, 20, 7063. [CrossRef]
26. Shapcott, M.; Hewitt, K.J.; Rajpoot, N. Deep Learning With Sampling in Colon Cancer Histology. Front. Bioeng. Biotechnol. 2019,
7, 52. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
27. Deng, J.; Dong, W.; Socher, R.; Li, L.-J.; Li, K.; Fei-Fei, L. ImageNet: A large-scale hierarchical image database. In Proceedings of
the 2009 IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, Miami, FL, USA, 20–25 June 2009; Volume 7, pp. 248–255.
28. Graupe, D. Principles of Artiﬁcial Neural Networks, Advanced Series in Circuits and Systems ; World Scientiﬁc: London, UK, 2013;
Volume 7.
29. Liu, Y.; Gadepalli, K.; Norouzi, M.; Dahl, G.E.; Kohlberger, T.; Boyko, A.; Venugopalan, S.; Timofeev, A.; Nelson, P .Q.; Corrado,
G.S.; et al. Detecting Cancer Metastases on Gigapixel Pathology Images. In Proceedings of the 2017 IEEE Conference on Computer
Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), Honolulu, HI, USA, 21–26 July 2017.
30. Krizhevsky, A.; Sutskever, I.; Hinton, G.E. ImageNet Classiﬁcation with Deep Convolutional Neural Networks. Commun. ACM
2017, 60, 84–90. [CrossRef]
31. Szegedy, C.; Liu, W.; Jia, Y.; Sermanet, P .; Reed, S.; Anguelov, D.; Erhan, D.; Vanhoucke, V .; Rabinovich, A. Going Deeper with
Convolutions. In Proceedings of the 2015 IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), IEEE, Boston,
MA, USA, 7–12 June 2015; pp. 1–9. [CrossRef]
32. Simonyan, K.; Zisserman, A. Very Deep Convolutional Networks for Large-Scale Image Recognition. In Proceedings of the
3rd International Conference on Learning Representations, Conference Track Proceedings, San Diego, CA, USA, 7–9 May 2015.
[CrossRef]
33. Huang, G.; Liu, Z.; Van Der Maaten, L.; Weinberger, K.Q. Densely Connected Convolutional Networks. In Proceedings of the
2017 IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), Honolulu, HI, USA, 21–26 July 2017; pp. 2261–2269.
[CrossRef]
34. Goodfellow, I.J.; Pouget-Abadie, J.; Mirza, M.; Xu, B.; Warde-Farley, D.; Ozair, S.; Courville, A.; Bengio, Y. Generative Adversarial
Networks. Commun. ACM 2020, 63, 139–144. [CrossRef]
35. Page, M.J.; McKenzie, J.E.; Bossuyt, P .M.; Boutron, I.; Hoffmann, T.C.; Mulrow, C.D.; Shamseer, L.; Tetzlaff, J.M.; Akl, E.A.;
Brennan, S.E.; et al. The PRISMA 2020 Statement: An Updated Guideline for Reporting Systematic Reviews. Int. J. Surg. 2021,
88, 105906. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
36. Gupta, P .; Huang, Y.; Sahoo, P .K.; You, J.F.; Chiang, S.F.; Onthoni, D.D.; Chern, Y.J.; Chao, K.Y.; Chiang, J.M.; Yeh, C.Y.; et al. Colon
Tissues Classiﬁcation and Localization in Whole Slide Images Using Deep Learning. Diagnostics 2021, 11, 1398. [CrossRef]
37. Zhou, C.; Jin, Y.; Chen, Y.; Huang, S.; Huang, R.; Wang, Y.; Zhao, Y.; Chen, Y.; Guo, L.; Liao, J. Histopathology Classiﬁcation and
Localization of Colorectal Cancer Using Global Labels by Weakly Supervised Deep Learning. Comput. Med. Imaging Graph. 2021,
88, 101861. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
38. Yoon, H.; Lee, J.; Oh, J.E.; Kim, H.R.; Lee, S.; Chang, H.J.; Sohn, D.K. Tumor Identiﬁcation in Colorectal Histology Images Using a
Convolutional Neural Network. J. Digit. Imaging 2019, 32, 131–140. [CrossRef]
39. Xu, L.; Walker, B.; Liang, P .-I.; Tong, Y.; Xu, C.; Su, Y.; Karsan, A. Colorectal Cancer Detection Based on Deep Learning.J. Pathol.
Inform. 2020, 11, 28. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
40. Mittal, P .; Condina, M.R.; Klingler-Hoffmann, M.; Kaur, G.; Oehler, M.K.; Sieber, O.M.; Palmieri, M.; Kommoss, S.; Brucker, S.;
McDonnell, M.D.; et al. Cancer Tissue Classiﬁcation Using Supervised Machine Learning Applied to Maldi Mass Spectrometry
Imaging. Cancers 2021, 13, 5388. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
41. Jia, Z.; Huang, X.; Chang, E.I.C.; Xu, Y. Constrained Deep Weak Supervision for Histopathology Image Segmentation. IEEE Trans.
Med. Imaging 2017, 36, 2376–2388. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
42. Nguyen, H.-G.; Blank, A.; Dawson, H.E.; Lugli, A.; Zlobec, I. Classiﬁcation of Colorectal Tissue Images from High Throughput
Tissue Microarrays by Ensemble Deep Learning Methods. Sci. Rep. 2021, 11, 2371. [CrossRef]
43. Hosseinzadeh Kassani, S.; Hosseinzadeh Kassani, P .; Wesolowski, M.J.; Schneider, K.A.; Deters, R. Deep Transfer Learning Based
Model for Colorectal Cancer Histopathology Segmentation: A Comparative Study of Deep Pre-Trained Models. Int. J. Med.
Inform. 2022, 159, 104669. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
44. Qaiser, T.; Tsang, Y.-W.; Taniyama, D.; Sakamoto, N.; Nakane, K.; Epstein, D.; Rajpoot, N. Fast and Accurate Tumor Segmentation
of Histology Images Using Persistent Homology and Deep Convolutional Features. Med. Image Anal. 2019, 55, 1–14. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
45. Wang, K.S.; Yu, G.; Xu, C.; Meng, X.H.; Zhou, J.; Zheng, C.; Deng, Z.; Shang, L.; Liu, R.; Su, S.; et al. Accurate Diagnosis of
Colorectal Cancer Based on Histopathology Images Using Artiﬁcial Intelligence. BMC Med. 2021, 19, 76. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
46. Shen, Y.; Ke, J. Sampling Based Tumor Recognition in Whole-Slide Histology Image with Deep Learning Approaches. IEEE/ACM
Trans. Comput. Biol. Bioinform. 2021, 14, 1. [CrossRef]
47. Yu, G.; Sun, K.; Xu, C.; Shi, X.-H.; Wu, C.; Xie, T.; Meng, R.-Q.; Meng, X.-H.; Wang, K.-S.; Xiao, H.-M.; et al. Accurate Recognition
of Colorectal Cancer with Semi-Supervised Deep Learning on Pathological Images. Nat. Commun. 2021, 12, 6311. [CrossRef]

Diagnostics 2022, 12, 837 29 of 32
48. To˘ gaçar, M. Disease Type Detection in Lung and Colon Cancer Images Using the Complement Approach of Inefﬁcient Sets.
Comput. Biol. Med. 2021, 137, 104827. [CrossRef]
49. Masud, M.; Sikder, N.; Nahid, A.-A.; Bairagi, A.K.; AlZain, M.A. A Machine Learning Approach to Diagnosing Lung and Colon
Cancer Using a Deep Learning-Based Classiﬁcation Framework. Sensors 2021, 21, 748. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
50. Song, Z.; Yu, C.; Zou, S.; Wang, W.; Huang, Y.; Ding, X.; Liu, J.; Shao, L.; Yuan, J.; Gou, X.; et al. Automatic Deep Learning-Based
Colorectal Adenoma Detection System and Its Similarities with Pathologists. BMJ Open 2020, 10, e036423. [CrossRef]
51. Terradillos, E.; Saratxaga, C.; Mattana, S.; Cicchi, R.; Pavone, F.; Andraka, N.; Glover, B.; Arbide, N.; Velasco, J.; Etxezarraga, M.;
et al. Analysis on the Characterization of Multiphoton Microscopy Images for Malignant Neoplastic Colon Lesion Detection
under Deep Learning Methods. J. Pathol. Inform. 2021, 12, 27. [CrossRef]
52. Holland, L.; Wei, D.; Olson, K.; Mitra, A.; Graff, J.; Jones, A.; Durbin-Johnson, B.; Mitra, A.; Rashidi, H. Limited Number of
Cases May Yield Generalizable Models, a Proof of Concept in Deep Learning for Colon Histology.J. Pathol. Inform. 2020, 11, 5.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
53. Iizuka, O.; Kanavati, F.; Kato, K.; Rambeau, M.; Arihiro, K.; Tsuneki, M. Deep Learning Models for Histopathological Classiﬁcation
of Gastric and Colonic Epithelial Tumours. Sci. Rep. 2020, 10, 1504. [CrossRef]
54. Haj-Hassan, H.; Chaddad, A.; Harkouss, Y.; Desrosiers, C.; Toews, M.; Tanougast, C. Classiﬁcations of Multispectral Colorectal
Cancer Tissues Using Convolution Neural Network. J. Pathol. Inform. 2017, 8, 1. [CrossRef]
55. Sena, P .; Fioresi, R.; Faglioni, F.; Losi, L.; Faglioni, G.; Roncucci, L. Deep Learning Techniques for Detecting Preneoplastic and
Neoplastic Lesions in Human Colorectal Histological Images. Oncol. Lett. 2019, 18, 6101–6107. [CrossRef]
56. R ˛ aczkowski, Ł.; Mo˙zejko, M.; Zambonelli, J.; Szczurek, E. ARA: Accurate, Reliable and Active Histopathological Image Classiﬁca-
tion Framework with Bayesian Deep Learning. Sci. Rep. 2019, 9, 14347. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
57. Xu, Y.; Jia, Z.; Wang, L.B.; Ai, Y.; Zhang, F.; Lai, M.; Chang, E.I.C. Large Scale Tissue Histopathology Image Classiﬁcation,
Segmentation, and Visualization via Deep Convolutional Activation Features. BMC Bioinform. 2017, 18, 281. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
58. Wang, C.; Shi, J.; Zhang, Q.; Ying, S. Histopathological Image Classiﬁcation with Bilinear Convolutional Neural Networks. Proc.
Annu. Int. Conf. IEEE Eng. Med. Biol. Soc. EMBS 2017, 2017, 4050–4053. [CrossRef]
59. Paladini, E.; Vantaggiato, E.; Bougourzi, F.; Distante, C.; Hadid, A.; Taleb-Ahmed, A. Two Ensemble-CNN Approaches for
Colorectal Cancer Tissue Type Classiﬁcation. J. Imaging 2021, 7, 51. [CrossRef]
60. Jiao, Y.; Yuan, J.; Qiang, Y.; Fei, S. Deep Embeddings and Logistic Regression for Rapid Active Learning in Histopathological
Images. Comput. Methods Programs Biomed. 2021, 212, 106464. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
61. Ben Hamida, A.; Devanne, M.; Weber, J.; Truntzer, C.; Derangère, V .; Ghiringhelli, F.; Forestier, G.; Wemmert, C. Deep Learning
for Colon Cancer Histopathological Images Analysis. Comput. Biol. Med. 2021, 136, 104730. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
62. Tsuneki, M.; Kanavati, F. Deep Learning Models for Poorly Differentiated Colorectal Adenocarcinoma Classiﬁcation in Whole
Slide Images Using Transfer Learning. Diagnostics 2021, 11, 2074. [CrossRef]
63. Xu, Y.; Li, Y.; Wang, Y.; Liu, M.; Fan, Y.; Lai, M.; Chang, E.I.C. Gland Instance Segmentation Using Deep Multichannel Neural
Networks. IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng. 2017, 64, 2901–2912. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
64. Graham, S.; Chen, H.; Gamper, J.; Dou, Q.; Heng, P .A.; Snead, D.; Tsang, Y.W.; Rajpoot, N. MILD-Net: Minimal Information Loss
Dilated Network for Gland Instance Segmentation in Colon Histology Images. Med. Image Anal. 2019, 52, 199–211. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
65. Kainz, P .; Pfeiffer, M.; Urschler, M. Segmentation and Classiﬁcation of Colon Glands with Deep Convolutional Neural Networks
and Total Variation Regularization. PeerJ 2017, 2017, e3874. [CrossRef]
66. Van Eycke, Y.R.; Balsat, C.; Verset, L.; Debeir, O.; Salmon, I.; Decaestecker, C. Segmentation of Glandular Epithelium in Colorectal
Tumours to Automatically Compartmentalise IHC Biomarker Quantiﬁcation: A Deep Learning Approach. Med. Image Anal. 2018,
49, 35–45. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
67. Awan, R.; Sirinukunwattana, K.; Epstein, D.; Jefferyes, S.; Qidwai, U.; Aftab, Z.; Mujeeb, I.; Snead, D.; Rajpoot, N. Glandular
Morphometrics for Objective Grading of Colorectal Adenocarcinoma Histology Images. Sci. Rep. 2017, 7, 2220–2243. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
68. Shaban, M.; Awan, R.; Fraz, M.M.; Azam, A.; Tsang, Y.W.; Snead, D.; Rajpoot, N.M. Context-Aware Convolutional Neural
Network for Grading of Colorectal Cancer Histology Images. IEEE Trans. Med. Imaging 2020, 39, 2395–2405. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
69. Sari, C.T.; Gunduz-Demir, C. Unsupervised Feature Extraction via Deep Learning for Histopathological Classiﬁcation of Colon
Tissue Images. IEEE Trans. Med. Imaging 2019, 38, 1139–1149. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
70. Jiao, Y.; Li, J.; Qian, C.; Fei, S. Deep Learning-Based Tumor Microenvironment Analysis in Colon Adenocarcinoma Histopatholog-
ical Whole-Slide Images. Comput. Methods Programs Biomed. 2021, 204, 106047. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
71. Pham, T.D. Time-Frequency Time-Space Long Short-Term Memory Networks for Image Classiﬁcation of Histopathological Tissue.
Sci. Rep. 2021, 11, 13703. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
72. Pai, R.K.; Hartman, D.; Schaeffer, D.F.; Rosty, C.; Shivji, S.; Kirsch, R.; Pai, R.K. Development and Initial Validation of a Deep
Learning Algorithm to Quantify Histological Features in Colorectal Carcinoma Including Tumour Budding/Poorly Differentiated
Clusters. Histopathology 2021, 79, 391–405. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
73. Nearchou, I.P .; Ueno, H.; Kajiwara, Y.; Lillard, K.; Mochizuki, S.; Takeuchi, K.; Harrison, D.J.; Caie, P .D. Automated Detection and
Classiﬁcation of Desmoplastic Reaction at the Colorectal Tumour Front Using Deep Learning. Cancers 2021, 13, 1615. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]

Diagnostics 2022, 12, 837 30 of 32
74. Bian, C.; Wang, Y.; Lu, Z.; An, Y.; Wang, H.; Kong, L.; Du, Y.; Tian, J. Immunoaizer: A Deep Learning-based Computational
Framework to Characterize Cell Distribution and Gene Mutation in Tumor Microenvironment. Cancers 2021, 13, 1659. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
75. Swiderska-Chadaj, Z.; Pinckaers, H.; van Rijthoven, M.; Balkenhol, M.; Melnikova, M.; Geessink, O.; Manson, Q.; Sherman, M.;
Polonia, A.; Parry, J.; et al. Learning to Detect Lymphocytes in Immunohistochemistry with Deep Learning. Med. Image Anal.
2019, 58, 101547. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
76. Xu, Z.; Li, Y.; Wang, Y.; Zhang, S.; Huang, Y.; Yao, S.; Han, C.; Pan, X.; Shi, Z.; Mao, Y.; et al. A Deep Learning Quantiﬁed
Stroma-Immune Score to Predict Survival of Patients with Stage II–III Colorectal Cancer. Cancer Cell Int. 2021, 21, 585. [CrossRef]
77. Jang, H.J.; Lee, A.; Kang, J.; Song, I.H.; Lee, S.H. Prediction of Clinically Actionable Genetic Alterations from Colorectal Cancer
Histopathology Images Using Deep Learning. World J. Gastroenterol. 2020, 26, 6207–6223. [CrossRef]
78. Bilal, M.; Raza, S.E.A.; Azam, A.; Graham, S.; Ilyas, M.; Cree, I.A.; Snead, D.; Minhas, F.; Rajpoot, N.M. Development and
Validation of a Weakly Supervised Deep Learning Framework to Predict the Status of Molecular Pathways and Key Mutations in
Colorectal Cancer from Routine Histology Images: A Retrospective Study. Lancet Digit. Health 2021, 3, e763–e772. [CrossRef]
79. Schrammen, P .L.; Ghaffari Laleh, N.; Echle, A.; Truhn, D.; Schulz, V .; Brinker, T.J.; Brenner, H.; Chang-Claude, J.; Alwers, E.;
Brobeil, A.; et al. Weakly Supervised Annotation-Free Cancer Detection and Prediction of Genotype in Routine Histopathology. J.
Pathol. 2022, 256, 50–60. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
80. Popovici, V .; Budinská, E.; Dušek, L.; Kozubek, M.; Bosman, F. Image-Based Surrogate Biomarkers for Molecular Subtypes of
Colorectal Cancer. Bioinformatics 2017, 33, 2002–2009. [CrossRef]
81. Xu, J.; Luo, X.; Wang, G.; Gilmore, H.; Madabhushi, A. A Deep Convolutional Neural Network for Segmenting and Classifying
Epithelial and Stromal Regions in Histopathological Images. Neurocomputing 2016, 191, 214–223. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
82. Sarker, M.M.K.; Makhlouf, Y.; Craig, S.G.; Humphries, M.P .; Loughrey, M.; James, J.A.; Salto-tellez, M.; O’Reilly, P .; Maxwell,
P . A Means of Assessing Deep Learning-based Detection of ICOS Protein Expression in Colon Cancer.Cancers 2021, 13, 3825.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
83. Weis, C.A.; Kather, J.N.; Melchers, S.; Al-ahmdi, H.; Pollheimer, M.J.; Langner, C.; Gaiser, T. Automatic Evaluation of Tumor
Budding in Immunohistochemically Stained Colorectal Carcinomas and Correlation to Clinical Outcome. Diagn. Pathol. 2018, 13,
64. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
84. Sirinukunwattana, K.; Raza, S.E.A.; Tsang, Y.W.; Snead, D.R.J.; Cree, I.A.; Rajpoot, N.M. Locality Sensitive Deep Learning for
Detection and Classiﬁcation of Nuclei in Routine Colon Cancer Histology Images. IEEE Trans. Med. Imaging 2016, 35, 1196–1206.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
85. Höfener, H.; Homeyer, A.; Weiss, N.; Molin, J.; Lundström, C.F.; Hahn, H.K. Deep Learning Nuclei Detection: A Simple Approach
Can Deliver State-of-the-Art Results. Comput. Med. Imaging Graph. 2018, 70, 43–52. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
86. Graham, S.; Vu, Q.D.; Raza, S.E.A.; Azam, A.; Tsang, Y.W.; Kwak, J.T.; Rajpoot, N. Hover-Net: Simultaneous Segmentation and
Classiﬁcation of Nuclei in Multi-Tissue Histology Images. Med. Image Anal. 2019, 58, 101563. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
87. Chen, H.; Qi, X.; Yu, L.; Dou, Q.; Qin, J.; Heng, P .A. DCAN: Deep Contour-Aware Networks for Object Instance Segmentation
from Histology Images. Med. Image Anal. 2017, 36, 135–146. [CrossRef]
88. Kwak, M.S.; Lee, H.H.; Yang, J.M.; Cha, J.M.; Jeon, J.W.; Yoon, J.Y.; Kim, H.I. Deep Convolutional Neural Network-Based Lymph
Node Metastasis Prediction for Colon Cancer Using Histopathological Images. Front. Oncol. 2021, 10, 1–9. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
89. Kiehl, L.; Kuntz, S.; Höhn, J.; Jutzi, T.; Krieghoff-Henning, E.; Kather, J.N.; Holland-Letz, T.; Kopp-Schneider, A.; Chang-Claude, J.;
Brobeil, A.; et al. Deep Learning Can Predict Lymph Node Status Directly from Histology in Colorectal Cancer.Eur. J. Cancer
2021, 157, 464–473. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
90. Brockmoeller, S.; Echle, A.; Ghaffari Laleh, N.; Eiholm, S.; Malmstrøm, M.L.; Plato Kuhlmann, T.; Levic, K.; Grabsch, H.I.; West,
N.P .; Saldanha, O.L.; et al. Deep Learning Identiﬁes Inﬂamed Fat as a Risk Factor for Lymph Node Metastasis in Early Colorectal
Cancer. J. Pathol. 2022, 256, 269–281. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
91. Chuang, W.Y.; Chen, C.C.; Yu, W.H.; Yeh, C.J.; Chang, S.H.; Ueng, S.H.; Wang, T.H.; Hsueh, C.; Kuo, C.F.; Yeh, C.Y. Identiﬁcation
of Nodal Micrometastasis in Colorectal Cancer Using Deep Learning on Annotation-Free Whole-Slide Images. Mod. Pathol. 2021,
34, 1901–1911. [CrossRef]
92. Bychkov, D.; Linder, N.; Turkki, R.; Nordling, S.; Kovanen, P .E.; Verrill, C.; Walliander, M.; Lundin, M.; Haglund, C.; Lundin, J.
Deep Learning Based Tissue Analysis Predicts Outcome in Colorectal Cancer. Sci. Rep. 2018, 8, 3395. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
93. Skrede, O.J.; De Raedt, S.; Kleppe, A.; Hveem, T.S.; Liestøl, K.; Maddison, J.; Askautrud, H.A.; Pradhan, M.; Nesheim, J.A.;
Albregtsen, F.; et al. Deep Learning for Prediction of Colorectal Cancer Outcome: A Discovery and Validation Study. Lancet 2020,
395, 350–360. [CrossRef]
94. Wulczyn, E.; Steiner, D.F.; Moran, M.; Plass, M.; Reihs, R.; Tan, F.; Flament-Auvigne, I.; Brown, T.; Regitnig, P .; Chen, P .H.C.; et al.
Interpretable Survival Prediction for Colorectal Cancer Using Deep Learning. Npj Digit. Med. 2021, 4, 71. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
95. Zhao, M.; Yao, S.; Li, Z.; Wu, L.; Xu, Z.; Pan, X.; Lin, H.; Xu, Y.; Yang, S.; Zhang, S.; et al. The Crohn’s-like Lymphoid Reaction
Density: A New Artiﬁcial Intelligence Quantiﬁed Prognostic Immune Index in Colon Cancer. Cancer Immunol. Immunother. 2021.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
96. Jones, H.J.S.; Cunningham, C.; Askautrud, H.A.; Danielsen, H.E.; Kerr, D.J.; Domingo, E.; Maughan, T.; Leedham, S.J.; Koelzer,
V .H. Stromal Composition Predicts Recurrence of Early Rectal Cancer after Local Excision. Histopathology 2021, 79, 947–956.
[CrossRef]

Diagnostics 2022, 12, 837 31 of 32
97. Geessink, O.G.F.; Baidoshvili, A.; Klaase, J.M.; Ehteshami Bejnordi, B.; Litjens, G.J.S.; van Pelt, G.W.; Mesker, W.E.; Nagtegaal, I.D.;
Ciompi, F.; van der Laak, J.A.W.M. Computer Aided Quantiﬁcation of Intratumoral Stroma Yields an Independent Prognosticator
in Rectal Cancer. Cell. Oncol. 2019, 42, 331–341. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
98. Zhao, K.; Li, Z.; Yao, S.; Wang, Y.; Wu, X.; Xu, Z.; Wu, L.; Huang, Y.; Liang, C.; Liu, Z. Artiﬁcial Intelligence Quantiﬁed Tumour-
Stroma Ratio Is an Independent Predictor for Overall Survival in Resectable Colorectal Cancer.EBioMedicine 2020, 61, 103054.
[CrossRef]
99. Kather, J.N.; Krisam, J.; Charoentong, P .; Luedde, T.; Herpel, E.; Weis, C.A.; Gaiser, T.; Marx, A.; Valous, N.A.; Ferber, D.; et al.
Predicting Survival from Colorectal Cancer Histology Slides Using Deep Learning: A Retrospective Multicenter Study. PLoS Med.
2019, 16, e1002730. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
100. Schiele, S.; Arndt, T.T.; Martin, B.; Miller, S.; Bauer, S.; Banner, B.M.; Brendel, E.M.; Schenkirsch, G.; Anthuber, M.; Huss, R.; et al.
Deep Learning Prediction of Metastasis in Locally Advanced Colon Cancer Using Binary Histologic Tumor Images. Cancers 2021,
13, 2074. [CrossRef]
101. Theodosi, A.; Ouzounis, S.; Kostopoulos, S.; Glotsos, D.; Kalatzis, I.; Asvestas, P .; Tzelepi, V .; Ravazoula, P .; Cavouras, D.;
Sakellaropoulos, G. Employing Machine Learning and Microscopy Images of AIB1-Stained Biopsy Material to Assess the 5-Year
Survival of Patients with Colorectal Cancer. Microsc. Res. Tech. 2021, 84, 2421–2433. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
102. Echle, A.; Grabsch, H.I.; Quirke, P .; van den Brandt, P .A.; West, N.P .; Hutchins, G.G.A.; Heij, L.R.; Tan, X.; Richman, S.D.; Krause,
J.; et al. Clinical-Grade Detection of Microsatellite Instability in Colorectal Tumors by Deep Learning. Gastroenterology 2020, 159,
1406–1416.e11. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
103. Cao, R.; Yang, F.; Ma, S.C.; Liu, L.; Zhao, Y.; Li, Y.; Wu, D.H.; Wang, T.; Lu, W.J.; Cai, W.J.; et al. Development and Interpretation of
a Pathomics-Based Model for the Prediction of Microsatellite Instability in Colorectal Cancer. Theranostics 2020, 10, 11080–11091.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
104. Yamashita, R.; Long, J.; Longacre, T.; Peng, L.; Berry, G.; Martin, B.; Higgins, J.; Rubin, D.L.; Shen, J. Deep Learning Model for the
Prediction of Microsatellite Instability in Colorectal Cancer: A Diagnostic Study. Lancet Oncol. 2021, 22, 132–141. [CrossRef]
105. Wang, Y.; Coudray, N.; Zhao, Y.; Li, F.; Hu, C.; Zhang, Y.-Z.; Imoto, S.; Tsirigos, A.; Webb, G.I.; Daly, R.J.; et al. HEAL: An
Automated Deep Learning Framework for Cancer Histopathology Image Analysis. Bioinformatics 2021, 37, 4291–4295. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
106. Bustos, A.; Payá, A.; Torrubia, A.; Jover, R.; Llor, X.; Bessa, X.; Castells, A.; Carracedo,Á.; Alenda, C. XDEEP-MSI: Explainable
Bias-Rejecting Microsatellite Instability Deep Learning System in Colorectal Cancer. Biomolecules 2021, 11, 1786. [CrossRef]
107. Lee, S.H.; Song, I.H.; Jang, H.J. Feasibility of Deep Learning-Based Fully Automated Classiﬁcation of Microsatellite Instability in
Tissue Slides of Colorectal Cancer. Int. J. Cancer 2021, 149, 728–740. [CrossRef]
108. Krause, J.; Grabsch, H.I.; Kloor, M.; Jendrusch, M.; Echle, A.; Buelow, R.D.; Boor, P .; Luedde, T.; Brinker, T.J.; Trautwein, C.; et al.
Deep Learning Detects Genetic Alterations in Cancer Histology Generated by Adversarial Networks. J. Pathol. 2021, 254, 70–79.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
109. Sirinukunwattana, K.; Domingo, E.; Richman, S.D.; Redmond, K.L.; Blake, A.; Verrill, C.; Leedham, S.J.; Chatzipli, A.; Hardy,
C.; Whalley, C.M.; et al. Image-Based Consensus Molecular Subtype (ImCMS) Classiﬁcation of Colorectal Cancer Using Deep
Learning. Gut 2021, 70, 544–554. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
110. Nguyen, H.G.; Lundström, O.; Blank, A.; Dawson, H.; Lugli, A.; Anisimova, M.; Zlobec, I. Image-Based Assessment of
Extracellular Mucin-to-Tumor Area Predicts Consensus Molecular Subtypes (CMS) in Colorectal Cancer.Mod. Pathol. 2022, 35,
240–248. [CrossRef]
111. Shimada, Y.; Okuda, S.; Watanabe, Y.; Tajima, Y.; Nagahashi, M.; Ichikawa, H.; Nakano, M.; Sakata, J.; Takii, Y.; Kawasaki, T.; et al.
Histopathological Characteristics and Artiﬁcial Intelligence for Predicting Tumor Mutational Burden-High Colorectal Cancer. J.
Gastroenterol. 2021, 56, 547–559. [CrossRef]
112. Riasatian, A.; Babaie, M.; Maleki, D.; Kalra, S.; Valipour, M.; Hemati, S.; Zaveri, M.; Safarpoor, A.; Shaﬁei, S.; Afshari, M.; et al.
Fine-Tuning and Training of Densenet for Histopathology Image Representation Using TCGA Diagnostic Slides. Med. Image Anal.
2021, 70, 102032. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
113. Medela, A.; Picon, A. Constellation Loss: Improving the Efﬁciency of Deep Metric Learning Loss Functions for the Optimal
Embedding of Histopathological Images. J. Pathol. Inform. 2020, 11, 38. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
114. Kim, H.; Yoon, H.; Thakur, N.; Hwang, G.; Lee, E.J.; Kim, C.; Chong, Y. Deep Learning-Based Histopathological Segmentation for
Whole Slide Images of Colorectal Cancer in a Compressed Domain. Sci. Rep. 2021, 11, 6047. [CrossRef]
115. Khened, M.; Kori, A.; Rajkumar, H.; Krishnamurthi, G.; Srinivasan, B. A Generalized Deep Learning Framework for Whole-Slide
Image Segmentation and Analysis. Sci. Rep. 2021, 11, 11579. [CrossRef]
116. Deshpande, S.; Minhas, F.; Graham, S.; Rajpoot, N. SAFRON: Stitching Across the Frontier Network for Generating Colorectal
Cancer Histology Images. Med. Image Anal. 2022, 77, 102337. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
117. van der Laak, J.; Litjens, G.; Ciompi, F. Deep Learning in Histopathology: The Path to the Clinic. Nat. Med. 2021, 27, 775–784.
[CrossRef]
118. Wang, Y.; He, X.; Nie, H.; Zhou, J.; Cao, P .; Ou, C. Application of Artiﬁcial Intelligence to the Diagnosis and Therapy of Colorectal
Cancer. Am. J. Cancer Res. 2020, 10, 3575–3598. [PubMed]
119. Montezuma, D.; Monteiro, A.; Fraga, J.; Ribeiro, L.; Gonçalves, S.; Tavares, A.; Monteiro, J.; Macedo-Pinto, I. Digital Pathology
Implementation in Private Practice: Speciﬁc Challenges and Opportunities. Diagnostics 2022, 12, 529. [CrossRef]

Diagnostics 2022, 12, 837 32 of 32
120. Baxi, V .; Edwards, R.; Montalto, M.; Saha, S. Digital Pathology and Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Translational Medicine and Clinical
Practice. Mod. Pathol. 2022, 35, 23–32. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
121. Oliveira, S.P .; Neto, P .C.; Fraga, J.; Montezuma, D.; Monteiro, A.; Monteiro, J.; Ribeiro, L.; Gonçalves, S.; Pinto, I.M.; Cardoso, J.S.
CAD Systems for Colorectal Cancer from WSI Are Still Not Ready for Clinical Acceptance. Sci. Rep. 2021, 11, 14358. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
122. Yoshida, H.; Kiyuna, T. Requirements for Implementation of Artiﬁcial Intelligence in the Practice of Gastrointestinal Pathology.
World J. Gastroenterol. 2021, 27, 2818–2833. [CrossRef] [PubMed]