Classiﬁcation and Histological Characteristics
of Colorectal Cancer
BROOKE DUBANSKY, SALLY LEWIS, DALE TELGENHOFF
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
1. Describe typical histological characteristics of dysplasia
in colorectal lesions.
2. Discuss the generalized progression of adenocarci-
noma from a benign adenoma (polyp).
3. List and describe some general histological character-
istics of the most common subtypes of adenomas
and adenocarcinomas.
ABSTRACT
Classiﬁcation and staging of recognized colorectal
cancer subtypes are based on histological characteristics
of the lesion and predictable changes in morphology.
Adenocarcinoma arising from adenomatous polyps is
the most common type of colorectal cancer. The histo-
logical progression from be nign, non-neoplastic polyps
to invasive neoplastic adenocarcinoma is, in many cases,
correlated with speci ﬁc molecular aberrations. This
review describes the classi ﬁcation, histological charac-
teristics, and progression of non-neoplastic, as well as
benign and malignant neopla stic, colorectal lesions.
ABBREVIATIONS: CRC - colorectal cancer, LCRC - left-sided
colorectal cancer, MSI - microsatellite instability, RCRC -
right-sided colorectal cancer, WHO - World Health
Organization.
INDEX TERMS: colorectal cancer, polyps, adenoma, adeno-
carcinoma, histology.
Clin Lab Sci 2024;00(0):1 –5
INTRODUCTION
According to the American Cancer Society, colorectal
cancer (CRC) is the third most common cancer diagnosed
in men and women in the United States, with 106 180 new
cases of colon cancer and 44 850 new cases of rectal
cancer predicted in 2022. Signs and symptoms of CRC
include a change in bowel habits, constipation (in some
cases diarrhea), rectal bleeding or blood in the stool,
abdominal discomfort, and unexplained weight loss. As
most CRCs begin as a polyp, early detection and removal
via colonoscopy are key to diagnosis and treatment and
improving the prognosis. The purpose of this article is
to review the classi ﬁcation and histological characteristics
of various CRC subtypes, with emphasis on the adenocar-
cinomas, which make up the majority of CRC cases.
Subsequent articles in this focus series build upon these
basic histological classi ﬁcations. Normal histology of the
colon is reviewed when appropriate; however, a more
in-depth review of normal colon histology is beyond the
scope of this article, and the reader is referred to a text-
book of histology.
1
The colon is divided anatomically into ascending,
transverse, descending, and sigmoid sections (Figure 1).
The sigmoid colon terminates in the rectum, which exits
the body at the anus. Outer longitudinal bands of smooth
muscle called taeniae coli span the length of the colon and
contract to move fecal material through the colon. Taeniae
coli form sacculations, also called haustra coli, which com-
partmentalize and partially control the movement of fecal
material through the large intestine.
1 The colon and rectal
segments of the large intestine are histologically similar,
with a mucosal layer specialized for protection and absorp-
tion of water.
1 The underlying lamina propria, unlike in the
small intestine, lacks lymphatic vessels. 1 This is an impor-
tant modiﬁcation, as invasive CRCs are slower to metasta-
size since they must penetrate the deeper tissues of the
intestinal wall to access areas with lymphatic drainage.
1
The regional location of the initial neoplastic lesion
(polyp) in the large intestine is correlated with the progres-
sion of the disease and, in some cases, the outcome.
2 For
prognostication, CRC is described as a ﬀecting 2 sectors: 1)
the right side as right-sided CRC (RCRC), involving the
ascending and transverse colon; and 2) the left side as
left-sided CRC (LCRC), involving the descending and sig-
moid colon as well as the rectum.
2 RCRC incidence is lower
than LCRC, although the incidence of this type is increas-
ing, especially in females.
2,3 Patients with RCRC typically
Brooke Dubansky , Louisiana State University School of
Veterinary Medicine
Sally Lewis , Tarleton State University
Dale Telgenho ﬀ,O a k l a n dU n i v e r s i t y
Address for Correspondence: Brooke Dubansky ,
Louisiana State University School of Veterinary Medicine,
bdubansky@lsu.edu
VOL 00, NO 0, 2024, CLINICAL LABORATORY SCIENCE | 1
FOCUS
 Copyright 2024 by .
 on June 11 2026 http://hwmaint.clsjournal.ascls.org/Downloaded from 

present with a higher grade and stage of cancer, with
larger tumors of the mucinous subtype.2 These tumors typ-
ically have a worse overall survival rate than LCRC, which is
characterized by smaller, lower-stage tumors.
2 Other char-
acteristics such as clinical presentation, immunologic
response, and the speci ﬁc molecular aberrations of CRCs
can also be correlated to this regional variation. 2
PROGRESSION OF COLORECTAL LESIONS
(BENIGN TO MALIGNANT)
Non-neoplastic lesions in the colon include inﬂ ammatory
bowel disease (ulcerative colitis) and Crohn ’s disease.
Benign, neoplastic lesions are called polyps. 4 With accu-
mulating mutations, benign polyps can progress to can-
cerous lesions. Adenocarcinomas, which form most
CRCs, are one such lesion that can progress from in ﬂam-
matory bowel disease (nonpolyploid) or benign polyps
(polyploid).4 Additional carcinomas frequently seen and
diﬀerentiated based on histologic appearance include
adenosquamous, spindle cell, and squamous cell carcino-
mas. Undi ﬀerentiated carcinomas can also occur. The
increased risk of cancerous transformation of inﬂ amma-
tory bowel diseases, such as Crohn ’s and ulcerative colitis,
is an important reason to screen a ﬀected patients fre-
quently for dysplastic change.
4 A dysplastic response pre-
cedes most cancerous CRC lesions and occurs when the
epithelial lining of the colon no longer exhibits normal
histological features, often due to recurrent cycles of
inﬂammation and healing.
4,5
Rather than a distinct separation between benign and
malignant colorectal neoplasms, it is perhaps best to view
the progression of the disease on a continuum. Normal
colon glands are single, tubular invaginations of the epi-
thelium lined by a single layer of columnar cells that are
interspersed with numerous mucin-secreting goblet cells.
1
These features, along with a thickened lamina propria and a
robust population of immune cells, facilitate absorption and
transport of water and electrolytes and protect the under-
lying tissue layers from bacterial invasion.
1 Dysplastic
change may result from a single mutation in one of the epi-
thelial cells, which prevents it from adhering to normal
growth regulations. Dysplastic epithelium in the colon
and rectum often becomes stratiﬁed, and nuclear changes
include hyperchromasia and elongation.
4-6 Low-grade dys-
plasia is characterized by retention of recognizable gland
architecture and fewer epithelial abnormalities than high-
grade dysplasia, which is characterized by more severe cell
and nuclear abnormalities and a loss of gland architecture.
5
Low-grade dysplasia carries less risk of cancerous progres-
sion than high-grade dysplasia. The dysplastic response
may be reversible, depending on the underlying cause of
the transformation and whether the stressors are relieved.
Additional mutations in the rapidly dividing cells of
dysplastic epithelium may lead to a loss of normal gland
architecture, resulting in an overgrowth of epithelium,
which can lead to polyp formation. At this point the
growth is referred to as an in situ neoplasm, provided it
has not invaded beyond the lamina propria into the under-
lying submucosa where it may access lymphatic vessels.
4,5
Additional mutations may lead to malignancy, character-
ized by invasion of the submucosa, and even the external
muscular layers (muscularis externa). Lymphovascular
invasion, lymph node involvement, and metastasis are
characteristics of advanced neoplastic disease.
4,5
STAGING OF CRC
The stages of CRC are based on the progressive continuum
described earlier. Staging involves the histologic appear-
ance of the tumor as well as other characteristics of inva-
sion and metastasis. The earliest stage, sometime called
stage 0, describes a carcinoma in situ, which is con ﬁned
to the epithelium or lamina propria. Stage I is characterized
by invasion into and beyond the submucosal layers where
tumor cells may gain access to the lymphovascular
system.
4 Stages 2– 3 exhibit progressive characteristics,
including deeper invasion, lymphovascular invasion, and
degrees of lymph node involvement. Stage IV, the last
stage, is characterized by distant metastasis to organs
and tissue, such as the liver, lung, or peritoneum. The scor-
ing system for staging CRCs uses the TNM scale, which
scores tumor characteristics (T) (grade, size), nodal involve-
ment (N), and metastasis (M) to distant organs.
4 Regardless
Figure 1. The large intestine (colon and rectum). The colon is
divided anatomically into ascending, transverse,
descending, and sigmoid sections. The sigmoid
colon terminates in the rectum, which exits the body
at the anus. Right-sided colorectal cancers (RCRCs)
involve the ascending and transverse colon (left of
dotted line); left-sided colorectal cancers (LCRCs)
involve the descending and sigmoid colon as well as
the rectum.
2 | VOL 00, NO 0, 2024, CLINICAL LABORATORY SCIENCE
FOCUS
 on June 11 2026 http://hwmaint.clsjournal.ascls.org/Downloaded from 

of the T and N scores, any distant metastasis results in a
stage IV diagnosis.
CLASSIFICATION AND CHARACTERISTICS OF
BENIGN POLYPS
Raised, benign colorectal lesions (polyps) may be inﬂ am-
matory, hamartomatous, hyperplastic, or adenomatous
(Table 1).6 A ﬁfth category of benign colorectal lesion is
the sessile serrated lesion (formerly called sessile serrated
polyp or adenoma),
7,8 which is an intermediate subtype
between hyperplastic and adenomatous polyps and is
characterized by a particular developmental pathway that
results in a distinct histological appearance (Table 1).
4
Macroscopically, polyps may be pedunculated (containing
a broad body and small, thin stalk) or sessile ( ﬂattened).
4
Adenomatous polyps exhibit a glandular architecture
and are the type that most frequently progresses to
adenocarcinoma, the most common type of CRC.
4,5
There are 3 types of adenomatous polyp that are char-
acterized by the histology of their gland structure: tubular
adenomas, villous adenomas, and tubulovillous adeno-
mas. Tubular adenomas are the most common subtype
and comprise about 75% – 80% of benign adenomatous
polyps. Other adenomas are represented by villous and
tubulovillous subtypes.
6,9 While making up fewer of the
adenoma subtypes, villous and tubulovillous adenomas
are more likely to undergo malignant transformation than
tubular adenomas. 9
Tubular adenomatous polyps are typically small
(<10 mm in diameter), pedunculated, and contain numer-
ous elongated branching crypts lined by a mucus-secreting
dysplastic epithelium.
6 The size of the polyp may be propor-
tional to the likelihood of malignant transformation. 4,6,9
Villous adenomatous polyps are usually large ( >20 mm in
diameter) and sessile and contain elongated villi in a pap-
illary growth pattern, giving them a velvety appearance. 6
The dysplastic glandular epithelium often lacks mucous-
secreting cells. Tubulovillous adenomatous polyps contain
intermediate features of the previously described morphol-
ogies in di ﬀerent regions of the polyp. 4,6
Sessile serrated lesions, which are histologically inter-
mediate between hyperplastic polyps and adenomatous
polyps described above, are characterized by low- to
high-grade dysplasia, a serrated glandular luminal pro ﬁle,
and an increased risk of malignant transformation.
3,4 One
study found that around 75% of serrated adenomas carry a
BRAF mutation.
10 Serrated adenomas represent a distinct
malignant pathway to adenocarcinoma. 9
CLASSIFICATION AND CHARACTERISTICS
OF CRC
The World Health Organization’ s( W H O’s) classi ﬁcation of
colorectal carcinomas identi ﬁes 5 categories: 1) adeno-
carcinoma, 2) adenosquamous carcinoma, 3) spindle cell
carcinoma, 4) squamous cell carcinoma, and 5) undi ﬀer-
entiated carcinoma. Adenocarcinomas are the most
common type, making up about 90% of all colorectal
carcinomas, 4,5,7,11 and are the only type discussed in
detail in this review. Adenocarcinomas commonly arise
from benign adenomatous polyps and progress to inva-
sive (malignant) neoplasms. Histological grading of
adenocarcinomas is independent of staging and may
help to determine prognosis in conventional adenocar-
cinomas.
5 As deﬁned by Fleming et al, well-di ﬀerentiated
adenocarcinomas (low grade) contain numerous recog-
nizable epithelial glands, constituting greater than 95%
of the tumor, while moderately di ﬀerentiated adenocar-
cinomas, which comprise most cases at diagnosis,
exhibit 50% – 90% recognizable gland formation. 5
Poorly di ﬀerentiated adenocarcinomas (high grade)
show less than 50% gland formation. In less common
adenocarcinoma subtypes (described later), histological
Table 1. Basic characteristics of benign colorectal polyps
Benign Colorectal Polyps
Basic Shapes
Pedunculated—broad body
with
a narrow stalk, most common
Sessile—raised body,
no stalk, di ﬃcult to
locate
Common Types With Description
Subtypes of
adenomatous polyps
Adenomatous Increased
likelihood of
cancer
progression
Tubular—small,
pedunculated; with
tube-shaped crypts on
microscopic exam
Villous—large, sessile,
elongated villi (velvety
appearance)
Tubulovillous—
diﬀering morphologies
in diﬀerent parts of the
polyp
Hyperplastic Overgrowth of cells; low chance of cancer
progression
Inﬂammatory Associated with inﬂ ammatory response
(ulcerative colitis, Crohn ’s disease)
Harmartomatous Overgrowth of normal-appearing tissue;
hereditary association (Peutz-Jeghers)
Sessile serrated Histologically similar to hyperplastic;
increased risk of malignant transformation
VOL 00, NO 0, 2024, CLINICAL LABORATORY SCIENCE | 3
FOCUS
 on June 11 2026 http://hwmaint.clsjournal.ascls.org/Downloaded from 

grade may be less likely to predict patient outcome than
molecular characteristics. 5
To become invasive, adenocarcinomas must pen-
etrate through the basement membrane, underlying con-
nective tissue (lamina propria), and muscularis mucosa
into the submucosa. Invasive tumors that only invade into
the lamina propria are not likely to metastasize because
the lamina propria lacks suﬃcient lymphatic vasculature.
1,5
Once the tumor invades into the lymphovascular network
of the submucosa, the most common site of metastasis for
most subtypes is the liver. Mucinous subtypes, however,
exhibit an uncommon metastatic pattern to the surface
of the peritoneal cavity.
11,12 On histology, the invasive
adenocarcinoma may appear sessile or pedunculated,
with a disruption in the muscularis mucosa, indicating
movement into the submucosa. Lymphovascular invasion
indicates a higher-stage tumor and suggests an increased
probability of metastasis. The degree of sentinel and dis-
tant lymph node involvement is also important in the
development of the staging score.
4 Desmoplasia (a ﬁbro-
proliferative response of the tumor stroma) and dirty
necrosis (necrotic debris in the gland lumina) are unique
histological features of adenocarcinomas.
4,5
ADENOCARCINOMA SUBTYPES
The WHO recognizes 6 subtypes of adenocarcinoma based
on histological appearance: 1) cribriform-comedo, 2)
medullary, 3) micropapillary, 4) mucinous, 5) serrated,
and 6) signet ring (Table 2). Mucinous subtypes make
up approximately 10% of adenocarcinomas.
12 Mucinous
subtype tumors are characterized by the excessive
amount of mucin composing the tumor, occasionally
approaching half of the total tumor volume.
5,13 Cells with
a signet ring morphology and intracellular mucin may
make up less than 50% of the tumor. 5 Mucinous carcino-
mas are more commonly RCRCs and generally present a
high stage at diagnosis.13 These tumors are less responsive
to treatment compared to conventional adenocarcinoma,
and, as mentioned previously, these tumors frequently
metastasize to the peritoneum rather than to the liver.
12
Molecular characteristics of mucinous adenocarcinoma
include microsatellite instability (MSI) (discussed in sub-
sequent sections) and a higher rate of KRAS, BRAF, and
PI3K mutations.12,13 Mucinous adenocarcinoma is often
associated with a hereditary predisposition for cancer
called Lynch syndrome.
5,12
The signet ring subtype of adenocarcinoma is rare,
making up less than 1% of adenocarcinomas, and is histo-
logically related to the mucinous subtype described
above.
5,12,14 Mucin makes up less than 50% of the tumor
volume and is associated with RCRC, MSI, and BRAF and
KRAS mutations.12 The overall prognosis is poor, usually
because of the high stage at diagnosis, with a mean 5-year
survival rate of about 30%. 12,14 Unlike many of the other
CRCs, the signet ring adenocarcinoma tends to a ﬀect
patients under 60 years of age. 12 The tumor derives its
name from the appearance of the tumor cell, which con-
tains a large mucinous vacuole that displaces the nucleus
to the outer rim of the cell membrane, thus giving it the
appearance of a signet ring.
5
Another rare subtype, medullary adenocarcinoma,
formerly known as large cell adenocarcinoma with mini-
mal di ﬀerentiation, is di ﬃcult to diagnose because of its
poor histological di ﬀerentiation.
12,15 This subtype occurs
most commonly on the right side of the colon (RCRC)
and is characterized by solid sheets of tumor cells and a
prominent lymphocytic in ﬁltrate.
5,11,12,15 Despite being
poorly di ﬀerentiated, medullary adenocarcinoma carries
a good prognosis, as it is less likely to spread to lymph
nodes.
5,11,12,15 This subtype is strongly associated with
MSI and BRAF mutations.5,11,12,15
Serrated adenocarcinoma may be mucinous or non-
mucinous and is characterized by the saw-toothed pattern
of the surface of the gland epithelium. This pattern is
induced by stages of epithelial growth separated by rest-
ing stages associated with a lack of apoptotic activity.
5 Like
serrated adenoma, serrated adenocarcinoma is histologi-
cally similar to hyperplastic polyps. 13 Up to half of all cases
develop from benign serrated adenoma and a ﬀect the
right side of the colon (RCRC). 13 This subtype is associated
with BRAF and KRAS mutations and carries a poor
prognosis.13
Micropapillary adenocarcinoma in the colon, as in
other organs, shows distinct micropapillary projections
within lacunae, which is a histological feature that can
mimic lymphovascular invasion (identiﬁ ed by clusters of
tumor cells ﬂoating in vessels).
12,16 The epithelium of the
micropapillae exhibit reverse polarity, with basal and api-
cal protein expression reversed, which is a unique charac-
teristic of this subtype.
16 Micropapillary adenocarcinoma
carries a poor prognosis because lymphovascular invasion,
lymph node involvement, and metastasis are common
features.12,16
Cribriform adenocarcinoma in the colon presents with
circular nests of epithelioid tumor cells, often with dirty
necrosis at the center.
17,18 This histological subtype
Table 2. Colorectal cancer subtypes
Colorectal Cancers
Types Adenocarcinoma—90% of all colorectal
cancer types
Adenosquamous carcinoma
Spindle cell carcinoma
Squamous cell carcinoma
Undiﬀerentiated carcinoma
Subtypes of
adenocarcinoma
Cribriform-comedo
Medullary
Micropapillary
Mucinous
Serrated
Signet ring
4 | VOL 00, NO 0, 2024, CLINICAL LABORATORY SCIENCE
FOCUS
 on June 11 2026 http://hwmaint.clsjournal.ascls.org/Downloaded from 

resembles cribriform subtypes of other cancers. 17,18
Epithelial nests are compartmentalized by an extensive
ﬁbrous stroma. This subtype is associated with MSI, a high
rate of lymphovascular invasion, nodal involvement, and
metastasis. Hence, it exhibits a poor 5-year survival rate. 18
CONCLUSION
Adenocarcinoma, being the most common type of CRC,
exhibits a large variety of histological characteristics and
subtypes. The histological features of adenocarcinoma in
general determine tumor grade and subtype classi ﬁcation
but are not always reﬂ ective of prognosis. Common
molecular aberrations that drive the progression of adeno-
carcinoma include KRAS and BRAF mutations and MSI,
among others. In the context of tumor histology, molecu-
lar variations may be more important for assessing tumor
aggression and patient outcome.
REFERENCES
1. Pawlina W, Ross MH. Histology: A Text and Atlas with
Correlated Cell and Molecular Biology . 8th ed. LWW; 2020:
chap 17.
2. Lee GH, Malietzis G, Askari A, Bernardo D, Al-Hassi HO,
Clark SK. Is right-sided colon cancer di ﬀerent to left-sided
colorectal cancer? - a systematic review. Eur J Surg Oncol.
2015;41(3):300– 308. doi: 10.1016/j.ejso.2014.11.001
3. Fu X, Qiu Y, Zhang Y. Screening, management and surveil-
lance for the sessile serrated adenomas/polyps. Int J Clin
Exp Pathol. 2014;7(4):1275– 1285.
4. Turner JR, Lingen MW. Oral cavities and gastrointestinal tract.
In: Kumar V, Abbas AK, Aster JC, eds. Robbins Basic Pathology.
10th ed. Elsevier Saunders; 2018:chap 15.
5. Fleming M, Ravula S, Tatishchev SF, Wang HL. Colorectal car-
cinoma: pathologic aspects. J Gastrointest Oncol. 2012;3
(3):153– 173.
6. Damjanov I. Pathophysiology for the Health Professions .
4th ed. Elsevier Saunders; 2012:chap 10.
7. Nagtegaal ID, Odze RD, Klimstra D, et al; WHO Classiﬁcation of
Tumours Editorial Board. The 2019 WHO classi ﬁcation of
tumors of the digestive system. Histopathology. 2020;76(2):
182– 188. doi: 10.1111/his.13975
8. Assarzadegan N, Montgomery E. What is new in the 2019
World Health Organization (WHO) classi ﬁcation of tumors
of the digestive system: review of selected updates on neuro-
endocrine neoplasms, appendiceal tumors, and molecular
testing. Arch Pathol Lab Med. 2021;145(6):664– 677. doi: 10.
5858/arpa.2019-0665-RA
9. Short MW, Layton MC, Teer BN, Domagalski JE. Colorectal
cancer screening and surveillance. Am Fam Physician.
2015;91(2):93– 100.
10. Spring KJ, Zhao ZZ, Karamatic R, et al. High prevalence of sessile
serrated adenomas with BRAF mutations: a prospective study
of patients undergoing colonoscopy. Gastroenterology.
2006;131(5):1400– 1407. doi: 10.1053/j.gastro.2006.08.038
11. Cunningham J, Kantekure K, Saif MW. Medullary carcinoma of
the colon: a case series and review of the literature. In Vivo.
2014;28(3):311– 314.
12. Nagtegaal ID, Hugen N. The increasing relevance of tumour
histology in determining oncological outcomes in colorectal
cancer. Curr Colorectal Cancer Rep. 2015;11(5):259– 266.
doi: 10.1007/s11888-015-0280-7
13. Lee C-T, Huang Y-C, Hung L-Y, et al. Serrated adenocarcinoma
morphology in colorectal mucinous adenocarcinoma is associ-
ated with improved patient survival. Oncotarget. 2017;8(21):
35165– 35175. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.16815
14. Mora-Guzmán I, Di Martino M, Mu ˜noz de
 Nova JL, et al.
Primary signet ring cell carcinoma of the colon: a rare condi-
tion with a poor prognosis. A report on two cases. Rev
Gastroenterol Mex (Engl Ed). 2018;83(3):358 – 360. doi: 10.
1016/j.rgmxen.2017.07.010
15. G ´ omez-Álvarez MA, Lino-Silva LS, Salcedo-Hernández RA, et al.
Medullary colonic carcinoma with microsatellite instability has
lower survival compared with conventional colonic adenocar-
cinoma with microsatellite instability. Prz Gastroenterol.
2017;12(3):208– 214. doi: 10.5114/pg.2016.64740
16. Akimoto N, Fujimori T, Mitomi H, et al. Micropapillary pattern
at the invasive front and its association with unresectable
colorectal carcinomas. Dis Markers. 2013;35(5):451– 455.
doi: 10.1155/2013/851623
17. Lino-Silva LS, Salcedo-Hernández RA, Herrera-G ´ omez A, et al.
Colonic cribriform carcinoma, a morphologic pattern associ-
ated with low survival. Int J Surg Pathol. 2015;23(1):13– 19.
doi: 10.1177/1066896914542125
18. Branca G, Ieni A, Barresi V, Tuccari G, Caruso RA. An updated
review of cribriform carcinomas with emphasis on histopa-
thological diagnosis and prognostic signi ﬁcance. Oncol
Rev. 2017;11(1):317– 323. doi: 10.4081/oncol.2017.317
VOL 00, NO 0, 2024, CLINICAL LABORATORY SCIENCE | 5
FOCUS
 on June 11 2026 http://hwmaint.clsjournal.ascls.org/Downloaded from 