To Pretrain or not to Pretrain? A Case Study of
Domain-Specific Pretraining for Semantic
Segmentation in Histopathology
Tushar Kataria1,2,4, Beatrice Knudsen3, and Shireen Elhabian1,2,4
1 Kahlert School of Computing, University Of Utah
2 Scientific Computing and Imaging Institute, University of Utah
3 Department of Pathology, University of Utah
4 corresponding author
{tushar.kataria,shireen}@sci.utah.edu, beatrice.knudsen@path.utah.edu
Abstract. Annotating medical imaging datasets is costly, so fine-tuning
(or transfer learning) is the most effective method for digital pathol-
ogy vision applications such as disease classification and semantic seg-
mentation. However, due to texture bias in models trained on real-
world images, transfer learning for histopathology applications might
result in underperforming models, which necessitates the need for us-
ing unlabeled histopathology data and self-supervised methods to dis-
cover domain-specific characteristics. Here, we tested the premise that
histopathology-specific pretrained models provide better initializations
for pathology vision tasks, i.e., gland and cell segmentation. In this study,
we compare the performance of gland and cell segmentation tasks with
histopathology domain-specific and non-domain-specific (real-world im-
ages) pretrained weights. Moreover, we investigate the dataset size at
which domain-specific pretraining produces significant gains in perfor-
mance. In addition, we investigated whether domain-specific initializa-
tion improves the effectiveness of out-of-distribution testing on distinct
datasets but the same task. The results indicate that performance gain
using domain-specific pretrained weights depends on both the task and
the size of the training dataset. In instances with limited dataset sizes,
a significant improvement in gland segmentation performance was also
observed, whereas models trained on cell segmentation datasets exhibit
no improvement. Github Code Repository.
Keywords: Domain Specific pretraining· Gland and Cell Segmentation
· Transfer Learning.
1 Introduction
Deep learning models typically require a substantial amount of data to effectively
learn generalized latent space representations [4]. However, acquiring large medi-
cal image datasets is more challenging compared to real-world image datasets for
threeprimaryreasons.Firstly,theannotationprocessformedicalimagesinvolves
arXiv:2307.03275v2  [cs.CV]  21 Aug 2023

2 T. Kataria et al.
domain-specificknowledgefrompathologistsandradiologiststomanuallyoutline
anatomical structures. This is challenging given the global scarcity of pathology
and radiology experts [19,12,23]; Secondly, the image annotation interfaces are
inefficient in generating labor-intensive workflows. Thirdly, inter-observer dis-
agreement among medical professionals necessitates the involvement of multiple
experts to repeat each annotation task [5,7,21]. Lastly, in addition to the annota-
tion challenges there are biases in medical data. Biases in histopathology images
arise from variations in tissue quality, staining protocols leading to difference in
color and texture [11], scanning protocols and slide scanners [11,17,14].
These biases are often site-specific and can cause major distribution shifts
between different data sets, which in turn reduces the generalization of deep
learning models [11,17].
Other forms of distribution shifts for histopathology in cancer cohorts in-
clude discrepancies between cancer and normal tissue histology, the proportion
of histologic cancer subtypes, grades and stages, and variations in clinical, demo-
graphic, and race-related variables [25,15]. These variables generate data imbal-
ances that can degrade the performance of deep learning models during testing.
Fig.1. Do different weight initialization matter?The study is designed from
the perspective of an AI user who can choose between multiple pretrained models
(domain or non-domain, supervised or self-supervised) options for a given task. The
best pretrained model is the one that has the highest accuracy on the task and is least
affected by distribution shifts. This study provides a framework to choose amongst
pretrained models and select the most advantageous for the task.
In medical image vision tasks, fine-tuning pretrained models (also known
as transfer learning) has become a common approach [6,18]. These tasks are
important for automated diagnosis, cancer grading and predictions of patients
outcomes across all cancer types.
Using supervised or self-supervised methods, deep learning models exhibit
strongcapabilitiestolearneffectivelatentrepresentations[3].However,theymay
sufferfromdomain-specifictexturebias[10],whichcanimpedetheirperformance
[22]. Previous research indicates that if sufficient data is available for training,
a model trained de-novo (i.e., from scratch) may outperform a fine-tuned model

To pretrain or Not to pretrain? Domain-Specific pretraining histopathology 3
[18,22]. This suggests a potential benefit of domain-specific pretraining [29,13]
over transfer learning from ImageNet [9].
Because large, annotated data sets are difficult to obtain for pretraining on
histopathology images, self-supervised (SSL) and annotation free methods pro-
vide an alternative strategy for pretraining models to learn valid representa-
tion in the latent space [2,28,1]. Models can then be further fine-tuned with
a few annotations to produce acceptable results on test datasets. However, no
studies systematically evaluated the impact of domain-specific pretaining for
histopathology models that are tasked to learn cell and gland segmentation.
The closest matching work to this study is an investigation of pretraining on
classification and instance segmentation tasks [13].
As gland and cell segmentation differ from instance segmentation and clas-
sification, the effect of pretraining on the analysis of out-of-distribution (OOD)
datasets also remains unknown. The contributions of this paper are as follows:-
– Comparison of de-novo trained models with pretrained models on the Ima-
geNetdatasetusingclasssupervision[9]andself-supervision[28]forsemantic
segmentation tasks in histopathology.
– Finetuning pretrained domain-specific (histopathology) models [13] for gland
and cell segmentation. These comparisons will indicate whether domain-
specific pretraining aids cell and gland segmentation.
– Determining the effect of compute resources and data quantity on model
performance improvements.
– Investigating whether domain-specific training leads to a better generaliza-
tion of models to data distribution shifts.
2 Different Pretrained Weights Used
To investigate whether domain-specific pretraining leads to generalization in
gland and cell segmentation tasks, the study aims to address the following re-
search questions:
− Is domain pretraining, which involves initializing the weights trained with
domain-specific images(histopathology), more effective for transfer learning
compared to pretrained weights from ImageNet data?
− Do self-supervised outperform supervised weight initializations?
− Does domain-specific pretraining enhance the quality of features and improve
the model’s performance on datasets with distribution shifts?
All initializations are compared against random initialization (i.e., training
from scratch), which serves as the baseline to identify initializations (mentioned
below) that outperform random. The flow diagram of the study is shown in
Figure 1.
Models are trained with 3 different types of initializations: (1)pretrained
weights using class supervision on ImageNet data: default weights are
provided in Pytorch forImageNetV1 and ImageNetV2. The top-1 accuracies in

4 T. Kataria et al.
the initialization amount to 76.13 and 80.85, respectively. These weights are ob-
tained by training a ResNet50 [9] model with class supervision. For two other
initialization, weights are obtained using a self-supervised technique called Bar-
low Twins [28]. (2)Pretrained weights with ImageNet data using SSL
(SSLImage): Self-supervised weights were obtained after training on data from
ImageNet without using labels. (3)Histopathology Domain-Specific pre-
training using SSL (SSLPathology):This model is released as part of the
study in [13] for domain-specific pretraining on histopathology data. The model
was pretrained using more than three million histopathology image patches sam-
pled from various cancers at different magnifications. More details about the
pretraining method and the dataset can be found in [13].
2.1 Dataset Details
We have experimented with gland and cell segmentation tasks on these five
histopathology datasets:
Gland Segmentation Datasets:Colon cancer datasets, GlaS and CRAG
[26,8],possessgroundtruthglandsegmentationannotationsfornormalandcolon
cancer glands. The GlaS dataset has 88 training & 80 testing images of size less
700x600 pixels, whereas the CRAG dataset has 160 training & 40 testing images
of size 1512x1512 pixels.
Cell Segmentation Datasets: Three cell segmentation datasets are used
for experimentation KUMAR [16], CPM17 [27] and TNBC [20] possess ground
truth annotations of nuclear outlines.
Table 1. Cell Segmentation Dataset Details.Sample examples of the dataset are
shown in supplementary Figure 9.
Datasets Train ImgsTest Imgs Img Size No. of Annotated Nuclei
KUMAR [16] 16 14 1000x1000 21623
CPM17 [27] 31 31 500x500 7570
TNBC [20] 34 16 512x512 4022
2.2 Implementation Details
A U-Net [24] model is used withResnet50 [9] backbone for semantic segmenta-
tion application(gland & cell both). The decoder is always the same for all mod-
els. Details of implementation can be found in the associated github5. Models are
trained using PyTorch and a data split of 80-20 for training and validation. The
best model possessing a minimum loss on validation data is further evaluated on
the test dataset. Testing data is only used for inference.
During training the patch size is 256x256, sampled randomly in the whole
image. At inference, predictions are averaged over a window size of 128 pixels.
5 GitHub Repository

To pretrain or Not to pretrain? Domain-Specific pretraining histopathology 5
The learning rate is fixed to 0.0001 and the number of epochs for all experi-
ments is set to 4000 for gland segmentation and 2000 for cell segmentation. The
models are trained five times and average metrics are reported, this ensures that
variations due to stochasticity caused by the dataset loader are factored out.
Data augmentation includes horizontal and vertical flips, random rotation, and
translation. All models are trained on NVIDIA V100 GPUs.
Evaluation Metrics:Dice and Jaccard scores (also known as the intersec-
tion over union) serve as metrics for segmentation tasks [26,24].
3 Results
Gland Segmentation Results:The line plots (standard deviation marked as
shading) of performance measures for different initialization are shown in Fig-
ure 2-A and 6-A. We trained models with different backbone initializations on
an increasing amount of data. The following observations emerged from these
experiments:- (a) Increasing the quantity of data improves performance for all
initializations and decreases variation. (b) For different training dataset sizes,
models with pretrained weight initializations outperform those with random
initializations, but the performance gap between models trained with random
initialization and pretrained weights decreases as the quantity of data increases.
(c) For small datasets, finetuning domain-specific pretrained weights has a sig-
nificant performance advantage over other initializations. However, as dataset
size increases, the effect diminishes6.
Variations in performance due to different amounts of training epochs for
all datasets are shown in Figure 2-B and 6-B. For very small datasets(10% and
30% graph), finetuning domain-specific pretrained weights outperforms all other
initializations at all epochs. However, for larger datasets(100% data), ImageNet
supervised weights also outperform at lower epochs. This show that domain-
specific pretraining is not dependent on computational power but rather on
dataset diversity. If a dataset is not diverse or small in size, then domain-specific
pretrained weights are beneficial, but other initialization can be better for higher
diversity and epochs. Qualitative results are shown in supplementary Figure 8,
domain-specific fine-tuned models have more accurate gland outlines and fewer
false positive pixels than other models.
Cell Segmentation Results :The performance of various initializations
is depicted in Figure 3. Even though some of the observations are similar to
those of previous experiments, novel observations emerge from cell segmentation
results:- (a) Model performances with KUMAR [16] data are an exception where
random initialization is outperforming or competitive with other initializations.
(b) Domain-specific pretraining is performing similar to or worse than ImageNet
initialization for most cases. Altogether our results demonstrate that fine-tuning
domain-specific pretrained weights does not improve the performance of the U-
Net/ResNet model for cell segmentation tasks. Qualitative results are shown in
supplementary Figure 9.
6 All images are best viewed on a digital device following magnification.

6 T. Kataria et al.
Fig.2.Gland Segmentation Results for Different Initializations on GlaS[26].
(A) Dice and Jaccard Score for different percentage of training data used. Solid line
shows the mean performance metrics, where as color shading shows the variance. We
can clearly observe that increasing data increases model performance, but with more
data domain specific pretraining doesn’t have a significant effect on performance. (B)
Average dice score variations with different amounts of training time, i.e., number of
epochs. We clearly see a difference in performance for different initialization for low
dataset size and lesser epochs. Results on CRAG dataset are shown in Supplementary
Figure 6.
Fig.3. Cell Segmentation Results. Different initialization has similar patterns,
i.e., with increasing data variation in performance decreases and mean performance
increases. But for cell segmentation domain specific pretraining doesn’t seem to be
better than image-net pretrained weights for different data sizes.
UMAP Results: We sampled 300 random patches from the test sets of
GlaS and CRAG to generate projections for encoders and decoders shown in
Figure 4. Feature values were extracted from the first encoder layer in U-Net,
the deepest encoder layer, and the last decoder layer.
In the network’s first layer, the projections of features from various initial-
izations form clouds that overlap. We interpret this observation to conclude that
the initial layers of deep neural networks capture low-level statistics and that all
initializations capture comparable attributes. As encoding depth increases, the

To pretrain or Not to pretrain? Domain-Specific pretraining histopathology 7
representations become more distinct and the overlap decreases, indicating that
networks pretrained in different ways may be learning different representations
of the same data. This is counterintuitive, as we would expect that each of the
pretrained models generates similar high-level representations when performing
identical tasks and using the same dataset. However, the distribution of features
in the UMAP projection of latent layer representations appears to have topo-
logical similarity across initializations which indicates that features for different
initialization may be related via a rigid transformation in latent space. A sim-
ilar conclusion is valid for the decoder UMAP. Together, these results suggest
that distinct initializations, despite being clustered at different locations in the
UMAP, might learn similar relational feature characteristics between samples in
the dataset.
Fig.4.UMAP for different Gland Segmentation models for GlaS and CRAG
datasets. We generate UMAP with nearest neighbor=25, distance=0.1, and met-
ric=cosine. Comparing the latent representation of the initial encoder to that of the
deepest encoder, there is substantially less overlap between initializations, but the dis-
tribution of points is topologically similar.
3.1 Out Of Distribution Testing Results
For OOD testing, we use the fine-tuned segmentation models (source dataset,
Dataset 1) with different initialization for out-of-distribution testing on other
datasets (target dataset, Dataset 2) without fine-tuning on the second dataset.
This analysis reveals the distribution bias various initializations learned during
the training (fine-tuning) process.

8 T. Kataria et al.
Gland Segmentation ResultsThe results for OOD testing for the gland
segmentation task are shown in Figure 5. At a low amount of data, the domain-
specific, finetuned models perform best and using random initializations results
in the greatest relative performance drop compared to all other initializations.
Fig.5. Average dice score for OOD testing.Y-axis shows the dataset used for
training of the model. X-axis is the performance on the corresponding test sets without
any fine-tuning. A model trained on CRAG datasets transfers effectively to GlaS, but
not vice versa. Domain-specific pretrained models are generally better at out-of-domain
performance.
Cell Segmentation Results: The results of OOD testing for different
datasets are shown in supplementary Figure 7 and lead to the following observa-
tions: (a) pretrained models are better than models with random initialization at
the same task on unseen datasets from KUMAR [16] and CPM17 [27]). In con-
trast,modelswithrandominitializationandtrainedonTNBC[20]outperformor
perform the same as the pretrained initialized model. (b) A drop in performance
exists on TNBC data for models trained on KUMAR [16] and CPM17 [27] but
not for models trained on TNBC [20] or KUMAR [16] and applied to CPM17.
(c) Domain-specific pretrained models when tested on OODdata demonstrate a
lesser drop in performance compared to other pretraining approaches.
4 Conclusion and Future Work
In this study, we demonstrate that a using domain-specific pretrained backbone
can be beneficial for gland segmentation when data are limited or of low di-
versity data for the task at hand. However, the performance gap for fine-tuned
domain-specific pretrained weights compared to random initialization decreased
as the amount of training data increased. The results of cell segmentation in-
dicate that domain-specific pretrained weights may not be advantageous for all
types of tasks. The results of UMAP projections indicate that the initial layers
of domain-specific and non-domain-specific models learn similar features, but

To pretrain or Not to pretrain? Domain-Specific pretraining histopathology 9
that the deeper encoders are distinct. Although the topology of latent feature
representations is similar for the different initialization, models may be learn-
ing similar high-level characteristics within the latent feature spaces. Lastly,
during out-of-distribution testing, models initialized with domain-specific pre-
trained weights suffered the same performance degradation as other initializa-
tions. Therefore, domain-specific pretrained weight initialization may not be
effective at learning site-independent features. Our final conclusion from this
study is that fine-tuning domain-specific pretrained weights may be beneficial
for specific tasks and datasets, but benefits are not universal. Domain-specific
pretrained weights suffer from the same issues as weights on image-net. Lastly,
we would like to make the reader aware that this study did not cover medical
vision tasks such as multi-class semantic segmentation and cell detection. We
also did not utilize models pretrained using vision-language models. Both these
comparisons are left for future work.
Acknowledgments
We thank the Department of Pathology and the Kahlert School of Computing
at the University of Utah for their support of this project.
References
1. Caron, M., Misra, I., Mairal, J., Goyal, P., Bojanowski, P., Joulin, A.: Unsupervised
learning of visual features by contrasting cluster assignments. Advances in neural
information processing systems33, 9912–9924 (2020)
2. Chen, T., Kornblith, S., Norouzi, M., Hinton, G.: A simple framework for con-
trastive learning of visual representations. In: International conference on machine
learning. pp. 1597–1607. PMLR (2020)
3. Chen, T., Kornblith, S., Swersky, K., Norouzi, M., Hinton, G.E.: Big self-supervised
models are strong semi-supervised learners. Advances in neural information pro-
cessing systems33, 22243–22255 (2020)
4. Deng, J., Dong, W., Socher, R., Li, L.J., Li, K., Fei-Fei, L.: Imagenet: A large-
scale hierarchical image database. In: 2009 IEEE conference on computer vision
and pattern recognition. pp. 248–255. Ieee (2009)
5. Eaden, J., Abrams, K., McKay, H., Denley, H., Mayberry, J.: Inter-observer vari-
ation between general and specialist gastrointestinal pathologists when grading
dysplasia in ulcerative colitis. The Journal of Pathology: A Journal of the Patho-
logical Society of Great Britain and Ireland194(2), 152–157 (2001)
6. Erhan, D., Courville, A., Bengio, Y., Vincent, P.: Why does unsupervised pre-
training help deep learning? In: Proceedings of the thirteenth international con-
ference on artificial intelligence and statistics. pp. 201–208. JMLR Workshop and
Conference Proceedings (2010)
7. Farmer,M.,Petras,R.E.,Hunt,L.E.,Janosky,J.E.,Galandiuk,S.:Theimportance
ofdiagnosticaccuracyincolonicinflammatoryboweldisease.TheAmericanjournal
of gastroenterology95(11), 3184–3188 (2000)
8. Graham, S., Chen, H., Gamper, J., Dou, Q., Heng, P.A., Snead, D., Tsang, Y.W.,
Rajpoot, N.: Mild-net: Minimal information loss dilated network for gland instance
segmentation in colon histology images. Medical image analysis52, 199–211 (2019)

10 T. Kataria et al.
9. He,K.,Zhang,X.,Ren,S.,Sun,J.:Deepresiduallearningforimagerecognition.In:
Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition.
pp. 770–778 (2016)
10. Hermann, K., Chen, T., Kornblith, S.: The origins and prevalence of texture bias in
convolutionalneuralnetworks.AdvancesinNeuralInformationProcessingSystems
33, 19000–19015 (2020)
11. Howard, F.M., Dolezal, J., Kochanny, S., Schulte, J., Chen, H., Heij, L., Huo,
D., Nanda, R., Olopade, O.I., Kather, J.N., et al.: The impact of site-specific
digital histology signatures on deep learning model accuracy and bias. Nature
communications 12(1), 4423 (2021)
12. Jajosky, R.P., Jajosky, A.N., Kleven, D.T., Singh, G.: Fewer seniors from united
states allopathic medical schools are filling pathology residency positions in the
main residency match, 2008-2017. Human Pathology73, 26–32 (2018)
13. Kang, M., Song, H., Park, S., Yoo, D., Pereira, S.: Benchmarking self-supervised
learning on diverse pathology datasets. In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Confer-
ence on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition. pp. 3344–3354 (2023)
14. Kataria, T., Knudsen, B., Elhabian, S.: Unsupervised domain adaptation
for semantic segmentation via feature-space density matching. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2305.05789 (2023)
15. Kataria, T., Rajamani, S., Ayubi, A.B., Bronner, M., Jedrzkiewicz, J., Knudsen,
B., Elhabian, S.: Automating ground truth annotations for gland segmentation
through immunohistochemistry (2023)
16. Kumar, N., Verma, R., Sharma, S., Bhargava, S., Vahadane, A., Sethi, A.: A
dataset and a technique for generalized nuclear segmentation for computational
pathology. IEEE transactions on medical imaging36(7), 1550–1560 (2017)
17. Liu, Q., Dou, Q., Yu, L., Heng, P.A.: Ms-net: multi-site network for improving
prostate segmentation with heterogeneous mri data. IEEE transactions on medical
imaging 39(9), 2713–2724 (2020)
18. Mensink, T., Uijlings, J., Kuznetsova, A., Gygli, M., Ferrari, V.: Factors of in-
fluence for transfer learning across diverse appearance domains and task types.
IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence44(12), 9298–
9314 (2021)
19. Metter, D.M., Colgan, T.J., Leung, S.T., Timmons, C.F., Park, J.Y.: Trends in the
us and canadian pathologist workforces from 2007 to 2017. JAMA network open
2(5), e194337–e194337 (2019)
20. Naylor, P., Laé, M., Reyal, F., Walter, T.: Segmentation of nuclei in histopathology
images by deep regression of the distance map. IEEE transactions on medical
imaging 38(2), 448–459 (2018)
21. Nir, G., Hor, S., Karimi, D., Fazli, L., Skinnider, B.F., Tavassoli, P., Turbin, D.,
Villamil, C.F., Wang, G., Wilson, R.S., et al.: Automatic grading of prostate cancer
in digitized histopathology images: Learning from multiple experts. Medical image
analysis 50, 167–180 (2018)
22. Raghu, M., Zhang, C., Kleinberg, J., Bengio, S.: Transfusion: Understanding trans-
ferlearningformedicalimaging.Advancesinneuralinformationprocessingsystems
32 (2019)
23. Robboy, S.J., Gross, D., Park, J.Y., Kittrie, E., Crawford, J.M., Johnson, R.L.,
Cohen, M.B., Karcher, D.S., Hoffman, R.D., Smith, A.T., et al.: Reevaluation of
the us pathologist workforce size. JAMA network open3(7), e2010648–e2010648
(2020)

To pretrain or Not to pretrain? Domain-Specific pretraining histopathology 11
24. Ronneberger, O., Fischer, P., Brox, T.: U-net: Convolutional networks for biomed-
ical image segmentation. In: Medical Image Computing and Computer-Assisted
Intervention–MICCAI 2015: 18th International Conference, Munich, Germany, Oc-
tober 5-9, 2015, Proceedings, Part III 18. pp. 234–241. Springer (2015)
25. Shi, L., Li, X., Hu, W., Chen, H., Chen, J., Fan, Z., Gao, M., Jing, Y., Lu, G.,
Ma, D., et al.: Ebhi-seg: A novel enteroscope biopsy histopathological hematoxylin
and eosin image dataset for image segmentation tasks. Frontiers in Medicine10,
1114673 (2023)
26. Sirinukunwattana, K., Pluim, J.P., Chen, H., Qi, X., Heng, P.A., Guo, Y.B., Wang,
L.Y., Matuszewski,B.J., Bruni,E., Sanchez, U.,et al.:Gland segmentationincolon
histology images: The glas challenge contest. Medical image analysis35, 489–502
(2017)
27. Vu, Q.D., Graham, S., Kurc, T., To, M.N.N., Shaban, M., Qaiser, T., Koohbanani,
N.A., Khurram, S.A., Kalpathy-Cramer, J., Zhao, T., et al.: Methods for segmen-
tation and classification of digital microscopy tissue images. Frontiers in bioengi-
neering and biotechnology p. 53 (2019)
28. Zbontar, J., Jing, L., Misra, I., LeCun, Y., Deny, S.: Barlow twins: Self-supervised
learning via redundancy reduction. In: International Conference on Machine Learn-
ing. pp. 12310–12320. PMLR (2021)
29. Zhang, S., Xu, Y., Usuyama, N., Bagga, J., Tinn, R., Preston, S., Rao, R., Wei, M.,
Valluri, N., Wong, C., et al.: Large-scale domain-specific pretraining for biomedical
vision-language processing. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.00915 (2023)

12 T. Kataria et al.
5 Supplementary
Fig.6. Gland Segmentation Results for Different Initializations on
CRAG[8]. (A) Dice and Jaccard Score for different percentage of training data used.
(B) Average dice score variations with different amounts of training time, i.e., number
of epochs.
Fig.7. Average dice score for OOD testing.Y-axis shows the dataset used for
training the model. X-axis is the performance on the test set of the datasets without
any fine-tuning.

To pretrain or Not to pretrain? Domain-Specific pretraining histopathology 13
Fig.8. Qualitative results for Gland Segmentation Experiments.We can ob-
serve that pretrained models have better qualitative results than Random Initializa-
tions. Domain Specific pretraining models perform better for gland segmentation tasks.
These models are better at recognizing the outlines of the gland compared to other
initializations.
Fig.9.Qualitative results for Cell Segmentation Experiments.We can observe
that pretrained models have better qualitative results than Random Initializations. But
all of the pretrained models make similar mistakes in the outlines of cells, touching cells
and distinguishing between cell and background.