cancers
Article
Segmentation and Grade Prediction of Colon Cancer
Digital Pathology Images Across Multiple Institutions
Saima Rathore 1,2, *, Muhammad Aksam Iftikhar 3, Ahmad Chaddad 4
 , Tamim Niazi 4,
Thomas Karasic 5 and Michel Bilello 1,2
1 Center for Biomedical Image Computing and Analytics, University of Pennsylvania,
Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA; michel.bilello@uphs.upenn.edu
2 Department of Radiology, Perelman School of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania,
Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA
3 Department of Computer Science, COMSATS University Islamabad, Lahore Campus,
Lahore 54000, Pakistan; aksam.iftikhar@gmail.com
4 Division of Radiation Oncology, Department of Oncology, McGill University, Montreal,
QC H3S 1Y9, Canada; ahmad.chaddad@mail.mcgill.ca (A.C.); tniazi@jgh.mcgill.ca (T.N.)
5 Department of Medicine, Division of Hematology/Oncology, University of Pennsylvania,
Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA; Thomas.Karasic@pennmedicine.upenn.edu
* Correspondence: saima.rathore@pennmedicine.upenn.edu; Tel.: +1-240-753-9111
Received: 6 September 2019; Accepted: 17 October 2019; Published: 1 November 2019
/gid00030/gid00035/gid00032/gid00030/gid00038/gid00001/gid00033/gid00042/gid00045/gid00001
/gid00048/gid00043/gid00031/gid00028/gid00047/gid00032/gid00046
Abstract: Distinguishing benign from malignant disease is a primary challenge for colon
histopathologists. Current clinical methods rely on qualitative visual analysis of features such
as glandular architecture and size that exist on a continuum from benign to malignant. Consequently,
discordance between histopathologists is common. To provide more reliable analysis of colon
specimens, we propose an end-to-end computational pathology pipeline that encompasses gland
segmentation, cancer detection, and then further breaking down the malignant samples into diﬀerent
cancer grades. We propose a multi-step gland segmentation method, which models tissue components
as ellipsoids. For cancer detection /grading, we encode cellular morphology, spatial architectural
patterns of glands, and texture by extracting multi-scale features: (i) Gland-based: extracted from
individual glands, (ii) local-patch-based: computed from randomly-selected image patches, and
(iii) image-based: extracted from images, and employ a hierarchical ensemble-classiﬁcation method.
Using two datasets (Rawalpindi Medical College (RMC), n = 174 and gland segmentation (GlaS),
n = 165) with three cancer grades, our method reliably delineated gland regions (RMC = 87.5%,
GlaS = 88.4%), detected the presence of malignancy (RMC = 97.6%, GlaS = 98.3%), and predicted
tumor grade (RMC = 98.6%, GlaS = 98.6%). Training the model using one dataset and testing it on
the other showed strong concordance in cancer detection (Train RMC – Test GlaS = 94.5%, Train
GlaS – Test RMC = 93.7%) and grading (Train RMC – Test GlaS= 95%, Train GlaS – Test RMC= 95%)
suggesting that the model will be applicable across institutions. With further prospective validation,
the techniques demonstrated here may provide a reproducible and easily accessible method to
standardize analysis of colon cancer specimens.
Keywords: hierarchical classification; gland segmentation; colon cancer detection; colon cancer grading
1. Introduction
Distinguishing invasive cancer from premalignant dysplasia or benign proliferation is a
fundamental task of pathologists examining colon specimens, and proper diagnosis and grading
is essential to guide treatment. One of the primary challenges in colon histopathology is inter-
and intra-observer variability that can signiﬁcantly alter treatment decisions [1,2]. Review by expert
Cancers 2019, 11, 1700; doi:10.3390/cancers11111700 www.mdpi.com /journal/cancers

Cancers 2019, 11, 1700 2 of 16
pathologists with subspecialty training in gastrointestinal malignancy is the gold standard for diagnosis,
but such second opinions are labor intensive, slow, and frequently unavailable in many resource-poor
areas. With digitized images of histology slides becoming increasingly ubiquitous, automated digital
pathology oﬀers an expedited and viable solution to this problem [3–5].
Digital analysis of histology images enables extraction of quantitative morphological features,
which can be used for computer-assisted grading of cancer, making the grading process more objective
and reproducible [ 6,7]. For colorectal cancers, computer-aided diagnostic systems must analyze
several morphological features of intestinal glands, including cellular architecture, gland formation,
and stromal components (Figure 1). Normal colon biopsy samples have a typical and uniform glandular
arrangement, but malignant tumor samples have a wide and heterogenous spectrum of disruption
of standard histologic features. Our research aims to exploit such variations to address three main
components of automated colon cancer diagnosis: (i) Automated gland segmentation, (ii) colon cancer
detection, and (iii) colon cancer grading. It is important to note that cancer detection, in this study,
refers to classifying between normal and malignant samples, whereas cancer grading, refers to further
breaking down the malignant samples into diﬀerent cancer grades.
Cancers 2019, 11, x FOR PEER REVIEW 2 of 16 
 
1. Introduction 
Distinguishing invasive cancer from premalig nant dysplasia or beni gn proliferation is a 
fundamental task of pathologists examining colon specimens, and proper diagnosis and grading is 
essential to guide treatment. One of the primary challenges in colon histopathology is inter- and intra-
observer variability that can significantly alte r treatment decisions [1,2 ]. Review by expert 
pathologists with subspecialty tr aining in gastrointestinal malignancy is the gold standard for 
diagnosis, but such second opinions are labor intensive, slow, and frequently unavailable in many 
resource-poor areas. With digitized images of hi stology slides becoming increasingly ubiquitous, 
automated digital pathology offers an expedited and viable solution to this problem [3–5]. 
Digital analysis of histology images enables extraction of quantitative morphological features, 
which can be used for computer-assisted grading of cancer, making the grading process more 
objective and reproducible [6,7]. For colorectal cancers, computer-aided diagnostic systems must 
analyze several morphological features of intestin al glands, including cellular architecture, gland 
formation, and stromal components (Figure 1). No rmal colon biopsy samples have a typical and 
uniform glandular arrangement, but malignant tumor samples have a wide and heterogenous 
spectrum of disruption of standard histologic feat ures. Our research aims to exploit such variations 
to address three main components of automate d colon cancer diagnosis: (i) Automated gland 
segmentation, (ii) colon cancer detection, and (iii) co lon cancer grading. It is important to note that 
cancer detection, in this study, refers to classifying between normal and malignant samples, whereas 
cancer grading, refers to further breaking down the malignant samples into different cancer grades. 
 
                           ( a)                                ( b) 
   
                       ( c)                       ( d)                           ( e) 
Figure 1. Example images: ( a) Normal colon tissue, ( b) detailed structure of a normal colon tissue; 
malignant colon tissue, (c) moderately differentiated, (d) moderately-to-poorly differentiated, and (e) 
poorly differentiated. These tissues have been st ained with hematoxylin and eosin (H&E) stain; the 
hematoxylin stains cell nuclei purple, and eosin stains the extracellular matrix and cytoplasm pink, 
with other structures taking on different shades, hues, and combinations of these colors. (a,c–e) were 
captured at 20× magnification, and (b) is one glandular region cropped from imagine (a). 
Most of the published research on gland segmentation demarcates glandular boundaries, and 
disregards the segmentation of internal glandular components. Moreover, the existing studies on 
automated analysis of histologic colon cancer specimens are based on global image features, and such 
analyses may miss important local details that may alter the diagnosis or treatment recommendations 
[3,8–11]. Prior automated systems have also typically focused on separate analyses for segmentation, 
cancer detection, and cancer grading [12–14], and have rarely developed end-to-end pipelines. 
In this paper, we propose a robust gland segmentation method for segmentation of glands and 
t h e i r  i n t e r n a l  s t r u c t u r e s  s u c h  a s  e p i t h e l i a l  c e l l s ,  n u c l e i  a n d  l u m e n .  W e  a l s o  p r o p o s e  a  n o v e l  
Figure 1. Example images: ( a) Normal colon tissue, ( b) detailed structure of a normal colon tissue;
malignant colon tissue, (c) moderately diﬀerentiated, (d) moderately-to-poorly diﬀerentiated, and (e)
poorly diﬀerentiated. These tissues have been stained with hematoxylin and eosin (H&E) stain; the
hematoxylin stains cell nuclei purple, and eosin stains the extracellular matrix and cytoplasm pink,
with other structures taking on diﬀerent shades, hues, and combinations of these colors. (a,c–e) were
captured at 20× magniﬁcation, and (b) is one glandular region cropped from image (a).
Most of the published research on gland segmentation demarcates glandular boundaries, and
disregards the segmentation of internal glandular components. Moreover, the existing studies
on automated analysis of histologic colon cancer specimens are based on global image features,
and such analyses may miss important local details that may alter the diagnosis or treatment
recommendations [3,8–11]. Prior automated systems have also typically focused on separate
analyses for segmentation, cancer detection, and cancer grading [12–14], and have rarely developed
end-to-end pipelines.
In this paper, we propose a robust gland segmentation method for segmentation of glands and
their internal structures such as epithelial cells, nuclei and lumen. We also propose a novel hierarchical
classiﬁcation method exploiting features at multiple image scales for colon cancer detection and grade
prediction. We aim to build an end-to-end computational pathology pipeline (Figure 2) for histologic

Cancers 2019, 11, 1700 3 of 16
colon cancer detection and grade prediction by incorporating gland segmentation, cancer detection,
and grading into a single automated analysis. This study contributes in ﬁve di ﬀerent ways:
1. A robust gland segmentation method that exploits the organizational appearance of colon glands
to demarcate gland boundaries and to segment internal glandular structures, including epithelial
cells, nuclei and lumen, and yields promising results for multiple datasets. The radiomic features
extracted from the segmented structures were later used in the classiﬁcation.
2. A multi-scale feature extraction mechanism comprising: (i) Gland-based features: extracted
from individual glands, which are segmented by the proposed gland segmentation method, (ii)
local-patch-based features: computed from randomly-selected patches of each histologic colon
image, and (iii) image-based features: calculated by considering whole image as one unit and
capturing global details.
3. Novel gland-based features, which encode morphometric properties of epithelial cells and lumen
and combine them with the spatial distribution of the nuclei in relationship to stroma and lumen.
4. A multi-level hierarchical classiﬁcation methodology to divide large-scale classiﬁcation problem
into a set of small-scale and easier-to-solve problems. In the proposed framework, the ﬁrst-level
classiﬁcation produces probability estimates based on each feature type (image-, gland-, and
local-patch-based features), and the second-level is an ensemble of various support vector machine
(SVM) classiﬁers trained on the probability estimates generated by the ﬁrst-level.
5. Demonstration of the generalizability of the proposed pipeline across multiple datasets.
Cancers 2019, 11, x FOR PEER REVIEW 3 of 16 
 
hierarchical classification method  exploiting features at multiple  image scales for colon cancer 
detection and grade prediction. We aim to build an end-to-end computational pathology pipeline 
(Figure 2) for histologic colon cancer detection and grade prediction by incorporating gland 
segmentation, cancer detection, and grading into a single automated analysis. This study contributes 
in five different ways:  
1. A robust gland segmentation method that expl oits the organizational appearance of colon 
glands to demarcate gland boundaries and to segment internal glandular structures, 
including epithelial cells, nuclei and lumen, and yields promising results for multiple 
datasets. The radiomic features extracted from the segmented structures were later used in 
the classification. 
2. A multi-scale feature extraction mechanism comprising: (i) Gland-based features: extracted 
from individual glands, which are segmented by the proposed gland segmentation method, 
(ii) local-patch-based features: computed from randomly-selected patches of each histologic 
colon image, and (iii) image-based features: calculated by considering whole image as one 
unit and capturing global details. 
3. Novel gland-based features, which encode morp hometric properties of epithelial cells and 
lumen and combine them with the spatial distribution of the nuclei in relationship to stroma 
and lumen.  
4. A multi-level hierarchical classification methodology to divide large-scale classification 
problem into a set of small-scale and easier-t o-solve problems. In the proposed framework, 
the first-level classification produces probability estimates based on each feature type (image-
, gland-, and local-patch-based features), and the second-level is an ensemble of various 
support vector machine (SVM) classifiers trained on the probability estimates generated by 
the first-level.  
5. Demonstration of the generalizability of the proposed pipeline across multiple datasets. 
 
Figure 2. Schematic overview of the proposed methodology: ( 1) Colon tissue histology images, ( 2) 
gland segmentation using the proposed multi-step method, ( 3) quantification of tissue morphology, 
(4) first level of classification using radial basis function (RBF) kernel of  support vector machine 
(SVM), and (5) second level of classification using majority voting based on the predictions of various 
weak classifiers such as linear, RBF, and sigmoid kernel of SVM. 
Figure 2. Schematic overview of the proposed methodology: ( 1) Colon tissue histology images, ( 2)
gland segmentation using the proposed multi-step method, (3) quantiﬁcation of tissue morphology, (4)
ﬁrst level of classiﬁcation using radial basis function (RBF) kernel of support vector machine (SVM),
and (5) second level of classiﬁcation using majority voting based on the predictions of various weak
classiﬁers such as linear, RBF, and sigmoid kernel of SVM.
1.1. Related Work
This section presents a review of contemporary literature in the three research directions on
colon cancer diagnosis, which have also been investigated in the current work, i.e., automated gland
segmentation, colon cancer detection and grading.

Cancers 2019, 11, 1700 4 of 16
Glandular structures in histopathology images can be segmented either by using generic [15] or
specialized methods [16–18]. Graph-based methods, which rely on generating graphs from glandular
structures, have been the most common method for gland segmentation. For example, Demir et
al. decomposed the glandular structures in their primitive objects and utilized the organizational
properties of these objects instead of traditional pixel-based properties [16]. The approach relies on
a region growing procedure, where the gland seeds are determined based on a graph constructed
from the nucleus and lumen objects. The seeds are grown using another object-graph constructed
on the nucleus objects alone. The ﬁnal boundary of glands is obtained based on the locations of the
nucleus objects and a false-positive elimination process based on information of the segmented grown
regions. Similarly, Fu et al. proposed a graph-based GlandVision algorithm [19]. Using the random
ﬁeld modelling in the polar space, the gland contours were extracted based on an inference strategy
that approximates a circular graph using two chain graphs. Then, a support vector regressor based on
visual features was used to verify that the extracted contour belonged to a true gland.
Some recent research eﬀorts have also employed deep neural networks for gland segmentation.
To this end, Kainz et al. [18] presented a deep convolutional neural network based pixel classiﬁer for
semantic segmentation of colon gland images. Two 7-layer convolutional neural networks (CNNs) were
used to predict whether individual pixels belonged to normal or malignant glands. These predictions
were then normalized based on weighted total variation using a ﬁgure-ground segmentation approach.
Wenqi et al. [20] also employed ﬁne-tuned CNNs for segmenting glandular structures, but combined
them with an SVM classiﬁer based on traditional radiomic features. Recently, for gland segmentation,
Chen et al. proposed a deep contour-aware network that uses a uniﬁed multi-task learning framework,
exploits multi-level contextual features, and employs an auxiliary supervision method to solve the
problem of vanishing gradients [21]. Graham et al. proposed a CNN that counters the information
loss incurred in max-pooling layers by re-introducing the original image at multiple points within the
network [17]. They used atrous spatial pyramid pooling with varying dilation rates for preserving
the resolution and multi-level aggregation, and introduced random transformations during test time
for an enhanced segmentation result that concurrently generates an uncertainty map and highlights
ambiguous areas. We aim to improve upon this prior art by proposing a gland segmentation algorithm
that not only delineates gland boundaries, but also demarcates the internal glandular structures using
a multi-step process based on the geometrical/morphological properties of the structures.
Several radiomic methods exist in the literature to distinguish benign and malignant colon
lesions. For example, Masood et al. [22] investigated local-binary-patterns along with Gaussian SVM to
produce reasonable classiﬁcation results. Classiﬁcation accuracy can be improved using an ensemble of
diﬀerent classiﬁers and hybrid combinations of discriminative features. For example, Rathore et al. [ 3]
employed diﬀerent ensemble classiﬁers such as rotation boost, rotation forest and random forest on a
hybrid feature set, comprising white run-length and area features, and achieved better classiﬁcation
accuracy than from any individual classiﬁer or feature. Similarly, combining a textural analysis of color
components with a histogram-of-oriented-gradients improved classiﬁcation performance [23]. Also,
chaddad et al. proposed several radiomic pipeline to evaluate the continuum of colorectal cancer using
various types of shape and texture features with multi classiﬁer models [12–14]. Considered the CNN
models, the classiﬁcation accuracy was improved compared to the conventional classiﬁer models [ 13].
Similar to automated gland segmentation, some researchers have employed graph-based
techniques to standardize colon cancer grading. Altunbay et al. [ 9] employed the characteristic
of circularity in shape of pink, purple, and white clusters of colon biopsy images. They applied a
circle ﬁnding algorithm on these clusters and computed discriminative features on a graph generated
from circular objects in these clusters. They validated this technique by detecting colon cancer from
colon biopsy images and discriminating diﬀerent cancer grades with high accuracy. Ozdemir et al. [10]
presented a similar technique based on graph creation from the three clusters of colon biopsy images
of normal subjects. These test graphs were compared with training graphs to determine whether
tissues were normal or malignant based on the extent of correlation with the test graph. In contrast,

Cancers 2019, 11, 1700 5 of 16
Rathore et al. [ 11] used lumen circularity, convexity, concavity, and ratio of lumen area to the size
of image and white cluster as features, which improved the accuracy of cancer grading. In a recent
study, Awan et al. measured the shape of glands with a novel metric that they called the “best
alignment metric” (BAM). A SVM classiﬁer was then trained using shape features derived from BAM
that yielded an accuracy of 91% in a three-class classiﬁcation into normal, low grade cancer, and high
grade cancer [24]. A comprehensive review further describes colon cancer segmentation, detection and
grading techniques [7].
Despite the signiﬁcant advances in the past two decades, end-to-end computational pathology
pipelines have rarely been developed by the researchers. Our paper aims to bridge this gap and
provides an end-to-end computational pathology pipeline for histologic colon cancer detection and
grade prediction by incorporating gland segmentation, cancer detection, and grading into a single
automated analysis.
2. Results
2.1. Performance of The Proposed Gland Segmentation Method
The segmentation results of the proposed algorithm are visually illustrated for various normal
and malignant samples (Figure 3). These results demonstrate that the proposed algorithm successfully
identiﬁes glandular boundaries and properly segments glands across irregularly arranged malignant
samples. The corresponding quantitative results are shown in Table 1 for two diﬀerent datasets, gland
segmentation (GlaS) challenge dataset, and Rawalpindi Medical College (RMC) dataset.
Cancers 2019, 11, x FOR PEER REVIEW 5 of 16 
 
biopsy images and discriminating different cancer grades with high accuracy. Ozdemir et al. [10] 
presented a similar technique based on graph creation from the three clusters of colon biopsy images 
of normal subjects. These test graphs were comp ared with training graphs to determine whether 
tissues were normal or malignant based on the extent  of correlation with the test graph. In contrast, 
Rathore et al. [11] used lumen circularity, convexity, concavity, and ratio of lumen area to the size of 
image and white cluster as features, which improved the accuracy of cancer grading. In a recent 
study, Awan et al. measured the shape of glands with a novel metric that they called the “best 
alignment metric” (BAM). A SVM classifier was then trained using shape features derived from BAM 
that yielded an accuracy of 91% in a three-class classification into normal, low grade cancer, and high 
grade cancer [24]. A comprehensive review further descri bes colon cancer segmentation, detection 
and grading techniques [7]. 
Despite the significant advances in the past two decades, end-to-end computational pathology 
pipelines have rarely been developed by the rese archers. Our paper aims to bridge this gap and 
provides an end-to-end computational pathology pipeline for histologic colon cancer detection and 
grade prediction by incorporating gland segmentati on, cancer detection, and grading into a single 
automated analysis. 
2. Results 
2.1. Performance of The Proposed Gland Segmentation Method 
The segmentation results of the proposed algori thm are visually illustrated for various normal 
and malignant samples (Figure 3). These result s demonstrate that the proposed algorithm 
successfully identifies glandular boundaries and properly segments glands across irregularly 
arranged malignant samples. The corresponding quantitative results are shown in Table 1 for two 
different datasets, gland segmentation (GlaS) challenge dataset, and Rawalpindi Medical College 
(RMC) dataset. 
(a) (b) (c) (d) 
(e) (f) (g) (h) 
(i) 
 (j) 
 (k) 
 (l) 
Figure 3. Example images showing the output of gland segmentation method. 1 st row: normal 
samples, and 2nd and 3rd row: malignant samples of varying cancer grades. The method successfully 
captures the bounds of glandular regions and leads to good segmentation results for images in the 1st 
Figure 3. Example images showing the output of gland segmentation method. 1st row: normal
samples, and 2nd and 3rd row: malignant samples of varying cancer grades. The method successfully
captures the bounds of glandular regions and leads to good segmentation results for images in the 1st
and 2nd rows despite the fact that images have huge variations and their glands appear in less regular
structures. The third row shows example cases where the method could not identify boundaries of
a few glands or has under-segmented (especially in the top-left corner of i and top-middle of j). All
images were captured at 20× magniﬁcation.

Cancers 2019, 11, 1700 6 of 16
Table 1. Performance of the proposed gland segmentation method.
Performance Metrics RMC-Dataset GlaS-Dataset
Segmentation accuracy 87.50 88.40
Jaccard index 0.86 0.89
Dice similarity 0.84 0.87
Sensitivity 0.90 0.92
Speciﬁcity 0.82 0.88
F-Score 0.88 0.89
2.2. Performance of The Proposed Cancer Detection and Grading Method
Classiﬁcation rates obtained using the individual features are summarized in terms of classiﬁcation
accuracy, sensitivity, speciﬁcity, and Matthew’s correlation coeﬃcient (MCC) for cancer detection and
respective grading (Table 2). Our predictive model’s accuracies in correctly classifying the normal
and malignant images on the GlaS and RMC datasets were 93.7% and 92.1% for gland-based features,
93.1% and 91.5% for patch-based features, and 92.5% and 90.9% for image-based features, respectively.
Similarly, the cross-validated 3-class accuracy of cancer grading on the GlaS and RMC datasets was
90.5% and 92.5% for gland-based features, 89.5% and 91.5% for patch-based features, and 89.7% and
90.7% for image-based features, respectively. No statistically signiﬁcant di ﬀerences of the feature
extraction methods between the two datasets by McNemar Test were noted.
Table 2. Performance of individual feature extraction methods (results are shown for the ensemble
classiﬁer for the patch-based features).
Gland-Based Local-Patch-Based Image-Based
GlaS-Dataset RMC-Dataset GlaS-Dataset RMC-Dataset GlaS-Dataset RMC-Dataset
Cancer Detection
Accuracy 93.7 92.1 93.1 91.5 92.5 90.9
Sensitivity 92.4 86.8 91.3 85.2 92.3 84.5
Speciﬁcity 95.1 98.6 93.9 97.4 92.7 95.9
MCC 87.4 85.0 86.2 83.7 85.0 82.3
Cancer Grading
Accuracy 90.5 92.5 89.5 91.5 89.7 90.7
Sensitivity 84.4 89.0 82.9 87.0 81.5 85.5
Speciﬁcity 93.1 94.9 92.0 92.5 91.6 92.4
MCC 79.0 83.9 76.0 80.6 74.7 78.6
The various constituents of the meta-classiﬁer were trained based on the probability estimates
generated by the ﬁrst-level classiﬁcation, and their output was combined using majority voting to
get ﬁnal predictions (Table 3). The cross-validated 2-class accuracy of cancer detection was 98.3% for
the GlaS dataset and 97.6% for the RMC dataset. Similarly, the cross-validated 3-class accuracy of
cancer grading was 98.6% both for GlaS and RMC datasets. All the individual classiﬁers performed
reasonably well for both cancer detection and grading tasks, however, an optimal combination of
many complementary imaging features /classiﬁers through a meta-classiﬁer achieved even higher
accuracy, which is statistically signiﬁcant (p < 0.01) at 95% conﬁdence interval. Furthermore, comparing
the assessment of individual features/classiﬁers with the multivariate results of combined features
and classiﬁers reveals that subtle individual features can be synthesized in an index of higher
distinctive performance.

Cancers 2019, 11, 1700 7 of 16
Table 3. Performance of the meta-classiﬁer for both data sets (results are shown for individual and
ensemble classiﬁer).
GlaS-Dataset RMC-Dataset
Linear RBF Sigmoid Ensemble Linear RBF Sigmoid Ensemble
Cancer Detection
Accuracy 94.3 95.4 94.8 98.3 92.1 93.3 92.7 97.6
Sensitivity 91.3 92.4 92.4 97.8 96.7 98.9 98.9 98.9
Speciﬁcity 97.6 98.8 97.6 98.8 86.5 86.5 85.1 95.9
MCC 88.7 91.2 89.8 96.5 84.2 86.9 85.8 95.1
Cancer Grading
Accuracy 94.2 94.5 93.7 98.6 91.3 93.6 93.5 98.6
Sensitivity 90.7 91.4 90.4 97.3 84.7 87.7 87.8 97.4
Speciﬁcity 95.7 95.9 95.0 99.0 93.7 95.7 95.4 99.0
MCC 86.4 87.3 85.4 96.4 78.4 83.3 83.2 96.4
A receiver operating characteristic (ROC) analysis was performed to verify the reliability of
classiﬁcation results. Area under the curve (AUC) was 0.95 and 0.99 for cancer detection of the RMC
and GlaS datasets, respectively, and 0.98 and 0.96 for cancer grading of the RMC and GlaS datasets,
respectively (Figure 4).
Cancers 2019, 11, x FOR PEER REVIEW 7 of 16 
 
Table 3. Performance of the meta-classifier for both data  sets (results are shown for individual and 
ensemble classifier). 
 GlaS-Dataset RMC-Dataset 
 Linear RBF Sigmoid Ensemble Linear RBF Sigmoid Ensemble 
Cancer Detection 
Accuracy 94.3 95.4 94.8 98.3 92.1 93.3 92.7 97.6 
Sensitivity 91.3 92.4 92.4 97.8 96.7 98.9 98.9 98.9 
Specificity 97.6 98.8 97.6 98.8 86.5 86.5 85.1 95.9 
MCC 88.7 91.2 89.8 96.5 84.2 86.9 85.8 95.1 
Cancer Grading 
Accuracy 94.2 94.5 93.7 98.6 91.3 93.6 93.5 98.6 
Sensitivity 90.7 91.4 90.4 97.3 84.7 87.7 87.8 97.4 
Specificity 95.7 95.9 95.0 99.0 93.7 95.7 95.4 99.0 
MCC 86.4 87.3 85.4 96.4 78.4 83.3 83.2 96.4 
A receiver operating characteristic (ROC) analys is was performed to verify the reliability of 
classification results. Area under the curve (AUC) was 0.95 and 0.99 for cancer detection of the RMC 
and GlaS datasets, respectively, and 0.98 and 0.96 for cancer grading of the RMC and GlaS datasets, 
respectively (Figure 4). 
 
Figure 4. Top-row: Receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curve analysis and the corresponding area 
under the curves (AUCs) for individual feature categories an d the meta-classifier. Bottom-row: 
zoomed in version of ROC curves. Left-to-right: Cancer detection for RMC-Dataset, cancer detection 
for GlaS-Dataset, cancer grading for RMC-Dataset, and cancer grading for GlaS-Dataset.  
2.3. Performance of the Proposed Cancer Detection and Grading Method across Different Institutions 
To determine the applicability of our radiomic analysis across datasets, we trained the two-stage 
classification framework on one dataset and tested it on the other, and vice versa (Table 4). For cancer 
detection, a model trained on the RMC dataset and tested on the GlaS dataset yielded an accuracy of 
94.5%, while a model trained on GlaS and tested on RMC yielded an accuracy of 93.7%. For cancer 
grading, an accuracy of 95.0% was observed for both training and testing pairs. 
  
Figure 4. Top-row: Receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curve analysis and the corresponding
area under the curves (AUCs) for individual feature categories and the meta-classiﬁer. Bottom-row:
zoomed in version of ROC curves. Left-to-right: Cancer detection for RMC-Dataset, cancer detection
for GlaS-Dataset, cancer grading for RMC-Dataset, and cancer grading for GlaS-Dataset.
2.3. Performance of the Proposed Cancer Detection and Grading Method across Diﬀerent Institutions
To determine the applicability of our radiomic analysis across datasets, we trained the two-stage
classiﬁcation framework on one dataset and tested it on the other, and vice versa (Table 4). For cancer
detection, a model trained on the RMC dataset and tested on the GlaS dataset yielded an accuracy of
94.5%, while a model trained on GlaS and tested on RMC yielded an accuracy of 93.7%. For cancer
grading, an accuracy of 95.0% was observed for both training and testing pairs.

Cancers 2019, 11, 1700 8 of 16
Table 4. Performance of the meta-classiﬁer across multi-institutions (results are shown for individual
and ensemble classiﬁers).
Train RMC-Dataset + Test GlaS-Dataset Train GlaS-Dataset + Test RMC-Dataset
Linear RBF Sigmoid Ensemble Linear RBF Sigmoid Ensemble
Cancer Detection
Accuracy 89.7 91.5 90.9 94.5 89.7 90.2 87.9 93.7
Sensitivity 97.8 96.7 96.7 96.7 96.0 96.7 91.3 96.7
Speciﬁcity 79.7 85.1 83.8 91.9 81.7 82.9 84.1 90.2
MCC 79.9 83.1 81.9 89.0 79.9 80.9 75.8 87.4
Cancer Grading
Accuracy 89.8 91.3 90.0 95.0 89.8 90.6 90.7 95.0
Sensitivity 82.2 84.5 81.6 91.6 84.1 84.7 86.0 92.8
Speciﬁcity 92.2 93.6 93.0 96.3 92.1 92.8 92.4 95.8
MCC 74.3 78.2 74.6 87.9 76.2 77.5 78.5 88.6
2.4. Interpretation of Features of Normal/Malignant Colon Tissues
To obtain a deeper understanding of the information (features) used by SVM to provide predictions,
boxplots of some predictive features were generated by dividing the patient cohort into 2 groups
according to the normal/malignant status. We have selected top-most 5 features based on the weight
assigned by the classiﬁer, and compared the values of these features in normal and malignant groups.
Boxplots of these features based on data from all the patients were created with the group type on
x-axis and its value on y-axis (Figure 5). The analysis revealed that each tissue type had a unique set
of radiographically interpretable features associated with it. The main ﬁndings from comparing the
features of diﬀerent tissue types are as follows:
1. Lower entropy values in normal colon tissue images (p = 5.6 × 10−5), suggestive of more uniformity
and proper organizational structure of tissue compared to malignant colon tissue that shows very
high entropy, indicative of more randomness and lack of any organizational structure;
2. Lower contrast values in normal colon tissue (p = 2.1 × 10−6), which again point towards coherent
and properly organized tissue. On the other hand, the higher contrast values in malignant colon
tissues show the lack of proper organizational structure;
3. Lower values of standard deviation of distances of cell nuclei from the centroid of lumen for
normal colon tissue (p = 8.6 × 10−4) are suggestive of the fact that cell nuclei are almost equally
spaced from the centroid of the lumen, whereas the same is not true for malignant colon tissue
where cell nuclei are at random distances from lumen;
4. Higher values of eccentricity (p = 2.1 × 10−3) and compactness (p = 5.8 × 10−4) in normal colon
tissues, consistent with the well-deﬁned shape of normal colon tissue. On the contrary, the
malignant colon tissues exhibit lower compactness and eccentricity, indicative of the migratory
and deeply inﬁltrated tissue.
Cancers 2019, 11, x FOR PEER REVIEW 8 of 16 
 
Table 4. Performance of the meta-classifier across multi-institutions (results are shown for individual 
and ensemble classifiers). 
 Train RMC-Dataset + Test GlaS-Dataset Train GlaS-Dataset + Test RMC-Dataset 
 Linear RBF Sigmoid Ensemble Linear RBF Sigmoid Ensemble 
Cancer Detection 
Accuracy 89.7 91.5 90.9 94.5 89.7 90.2 87.9 93.7 
Sensitivity 97.8 96.7 96.7 96.7 96.0 96.7 91.3 96.7 
Specificity 79.7 85.1 83.8 91.9 81.7 82.9 84.1 90.2 
MCC 79.9 83.1 81.9 89.0 79.9 80.9 75.8 87.4 
Cancer Grading 
Accuracy 89.8 91.3 90.0 95.0 89.8 90.6 90.7 95.0 
Sensitivity 82.2 84.5 81.6 91.6 84.1 84.7 86.0 92.8 
Specificity 92.2 93.6 93.0 96.3 92.1 92.8 92.4 95.8 
MCC 74.3 78.2 74.6 87.9 76.2 77.5 78.5 88.6 
2.4. Interpretation of Features of Normal/Malignant Colon Tissues 
To obtain a deeper understanding of the info rmation (features) used by SVM to provide 
predictions, boxplots of some predictive features were generated by dividing the patient cohort into 
2 groups according to the normal/malignant status . We have selected top-most 5 features based on 
the weight assigned by the classi fier, and compared the values of these features in normal and 
malignant groups. Boxplots of these features based on data from all the patients were created with 
the group type on x-axis and its value on y-axis (Figure 5). The analysis revealed that each tissue type 
had a unique set of radiographically interpretable features associated with it. The main findings from 
comparing the features of different tissue types are as follows: 
1. Lower entropy values in normal colon tissue images ( p = 5.6 × 10 −5) ,  s u g g e s t i v e  o f  m o r e  
uniformity and proper organizational structure of tissue compared to malignant colon tissue 
that shows very high entropy, indicative of more randomness and lack of any organizational 
structure; 
2. Lower contrast values in normal colon tissue ( p = 2.1 × 10 −6), which again point towards 
coherent and properly organize d tissue. On the other hand, th e higher contrast values in 
malignant colon tissues show the lack of proper organizational structure; 
3. Lower values of standard deviation of distances of cell nuclei from the centroid of lumen for 
normal colon tissue (p = 8.6 × 10−4) are suggestive of the fact that cell nuclei are almost equally 
spaced from the centroid of the lumen, whereas the same is not true for malignant colon 
tissue where cell nuclei are at random distances from lumen; 
4. Higher values of eccentricity (p = 2.1 × 10−3) and compactness (p = 5.8 × 10−4) in normal colon 
tissues, consistent with the well-defined shape of normal colon tissue. On the contrary, the 
malignant colon tissues exhibit lower compactness and eccentricity, indicative of the 
migratory and deeply infiltrated tissue. 
 
Figure 5. Interpretation of features of normal and mali gnant colon tissues. X- axis of the box-plots 
shows the tissue type, which is ei ther normal or malignant, and th e y-axis shows the value of the 
feature. The feature of standard deviation of distances (Std. distances) was scaled in the range (0 –1) 
for better visualization. 
Figure 5. Interpretation of features of normal and malignant colon tissues. X-axis of the box-plots
shows the tissue type, which is either normal or malignant, and the y-axis shows the value of the
feature. The feature of standard deviation of distances (Std. distances) was scaled in the range (0–1) for
better visualization.

Cancers 2019, 11, 1700 9 of 16
None of the individual features are suﬃcient to distinguish normal from malignant tissue but
multivariate analysis through machine learning accurately classiﬁes benign and malignant samples.
3. Discussion
In this paper, we have demonstrated accurate identiﬁcation and grading of malignant colon cancer
samples using an automated computational pathology pipeline.
The segmentation method proposed herein provided an accurate demarcation of glandular regions
of the colon tissue. We want to mention that despite the prior development of several deep-learning
based gland segmentation algorithms, we proposed an additional algorithm because the proposed
algorithm not only demarcates boundaries but also divides glandular region into its constituent
elements, that we later quantify in terms of features to use in the cancer detection and grading steps.
Also, in the absence of ground-truth of internal glandular regions, training deep learning algorithms
was not possible, therefore, we adopted an alternative approach comprising a series of image processing
steps to segment internal glandular regions. Moreover, there are several performance advantages of
the proposed algorithm over deep learning approaches. First, the processing time of this algorithm is
lower than that of computationally expensive deep learning algorithm. Second, this algorithm does
not need any training, and can be applied on any incoming specimen without having a pre-trained
model in place. Third, the method does not need any sophisticated hardware to run, and can run
on desktop machines having only CPU. The performance of the proposed algorithm on GlaS dataset
(F-Score = 0.89, Dice = 0.87) for the task of outer glandular boundary segmentation is also in par with
the existing methods. For example, the best performing method in MICCAI 2015 gland segmentation
contest [21] reported F-Score of 0.887, and another recent study [17] reported F-Score of 0.844 and Dice
of 0.836 on Test A, and F-Score of 0.914 and Dice of 0.913 on Test B datasets, respectively, released as
part of MICCAI 2015 gland segmentation contest.
Our multi-feature hierarchical classiﬁcation method consistently and substantially improved
upon the classiﬁcation performance of the individual-features-based classiﬁcation methods. Similarly,
the proposed ensemble frameworks, either the ensemble for patch-based features at the ﬁrst-level of
classiﬁcation or the ensemble for meta-classiﬁer at the second-level of classiﬁcation, reinforced the
classiﬁcation accuracy of individual classiﬁers and yielded better prediction estimates. Overall, our
methods achieved a high accuracy for cancer detection (RMC = 97.6%, GlaS = 98.3%) and grading
(RMC = 98.6%, GlaS = 98.6%). Importantly, the features highlighted as most discriminative by the
machine learning algorithm including entropy, cellular eccentricity, and nuclear displacement, are the
same visual features relied upon by histopathologists to distinguish between normal and malignant
tissues. Our ﬁndings are consistent with the previous literatures. For example, Chaddad et al. showed
that the feature of entropy is able to discriminate between four type of pathology tissues [12]. It was also
observed in another study [25] that the measure of eccentricity was a good predictor of intraepithelial
neoplasia, which is a precursor state for full-blown carcinoma.
3.1. Validation of the Proposed Method across Diﬀerent Datasets
To conﬁrm that our methods would be applicable across multiple institutions, we trained our
model on a dataset from one institution and tested it on a dataset from another institution. Previous
studies, either on demarcation of malignant and benign tissue regions, or on cancer detection and
grading have not undergone such validation [11,16,19,22,26,27]. Our ﬁndings (Tables 3 and 4) support
the notion that the combination of features and machine learning classiﬁcation proposed in this study
allows robust classiﬁcation of colon cancer datasets arising from multiple institutions, even if a new
dataset comes from an institution that was not part of the training sample. The validation of our
methods across datasets strongly suggests that our model will perform well in routine clinical settings
where samples are much more diverse than in controlled experimental settings.

Cancers 2019, 11, 1700 10 of 16
3.2. Importance of the Study
The computational pathology pipeline described in this paper addresses many of the current
barriers in clinical histopathology. This method oﬀers a standardized approach to resolve intra- and
inter-observer variability amongst pathologists and is easily implemented even in low resource settings
with available digital scanning tools. Importantly, although this study is focused on colon cancer, the
same approach could also be used for other types of cancer. For example, automated analysis may
improve grading in neuroendocrine tumors, where treatment decisions are heavily reliant on accurate
grading. Similarly, the speed and reproducibility of this method may improve reliability of grading in
heterogeneous samples. One additional application may be to identify tumor origin by facilitating
comparisons of multiple biopsy specimens from the same patient to determine the morphological
concordance between a metastatic site and a primary tumor.
3.3. Limitations and Future Work
Our study has several limitations. First, the proposed segmentation method has specially been
designed to segment the glandular regions, and is not suitable for regional separation of benign and
malignant tissue. However, the method could be tailored, with appropriate modiﬁcations, to be used
for regional demarcation of benign and malignant regions. Second, since our method is specially
designed to decode the morphology of glands, it cannot accurately quantify the features of extremely
deformed glands in very poorly-diﬀerentiated specimens. Another limitation of our study is that we
used retrospective data; a prospective dataset comparing our methods to standard histopathological
review would lend further validity to our model.
Beyond the scope of this work, there are several important future research directions. Previous
machine learning studies have shown strong association between the CT imaging characteristics and
survival of colorectal cancer patients [28] and molecular subtypes [29]. We aim to examine whether the
analysis of histologic features demonstrated here can similarly predict clinical outcomes and genomic
aberrations. A systematic analysis of these characteristics with the help of gland segmentation as part
of automatic image analysis framework could lead to a better understanding of the relevant cancer
biology as well as bring precision and accuracy into assessment and prediction of the outcome of
the cancer.
4. Materials and Methods
4.1. Datasets
The pathology data were obtained from two independent sources: (i) 174 images, acquired at
10× magniﬁcation factor, were collected from pathology department of RMC, Rawalpindi, Pakistan.
These images were subdivisions of 68 hematoxylin and eosin stained slides of colon resection specimens,
with each slide belonging to a diﬀerent patient. The hematoxylin stains cell nuclei purple, and eosin
stains the extracellular matrix and cytoplasm pink, with other structures such as lumen and epithelial
cells taking on shades very close to white color. The images were labeled as normal (n = 82) or malignant
(n = 92) by an expert pathologist, and malignant images were further categorized into three diﬀerent
grades (well-diﬀerentiated = 44, moderately-diﬀerentiated = 25, and poorly-diﬀerentiated = 23) [27];
(ii) 165 images, acquired at 20× magniﬁcation factor, were collected from the GlaS contest [30]. These
images were captured from 16 hematoxylin and eosin stained slides of colon resection specimens, each
from a diﬀerent patient. Images were labelled by an expert pathologist as normal (n = 74) or malignant
(n = 91), and malignant images were further distributed into three diﬀerent grades (moderate = 47,
moderate-to-poor = 20, poor = 24) [31]. To allow for comparison between the two data sets, we
converted these three categories into well-, moderately-, and poorly-diﬀerentiated grades. Contrast
enhancement was applied to decrease imaging artifacts. Following contrast-enhancement, images
were converted to gray-scale for further analysis.

Cancers 2019, 11, 1700 11 of 16
4.2. The Gland Segmentation Algorithm
A multi-step image processing method (Figure 6) was used to delineate colon glands in
biopsy images:
Cancers 2019, 11, x FOR PEER REVIEW 12 of 16 
 
4.2.8. Dilation of Nuclei 
Once the boundary nuclei were identified, the inner gland regions were dilated until all the 
voxels of all the boundary nuclei were added to the inner region, thereby constituting the complete 
gland region. 
To quantitatively measure the success of the obtained segmentation results, true+, false+, false– 
and true – were calculated using the manual segmenta tion as the gold standard and then the 
sensitivity, specificity, accuracy, dice similarity coefficient and Jaccard Index were computed. 
 
Figure 6. Schematic workflow of the proposed glan d segmentation method. Figure shows one 
glandular region cropped from an image captured at 20× magnification. 
4.3. Features for Colon Cancer Detection/grading 
For each image, we extracted multiple radiomic features captured at various scales, i.e., (i) 
image-, (ii) gland-, and (iii) patch-based features, in order to capture various phenotypic 
characteristics of the tumors.  
4.3.1. Image-Based Features 
The overall (global) texture of the images was quantified using Haralick texture features to 
appreciate significantly different texture of normal and malignant colon tissues. These features were 
computed from the Spatial Gray Level Dependence (SGLD) matrix constructed from the input image 
as a whole. The SGLD matrix measures the frequenc y of co-occurrences of pairs of gray-levels at 
certain offset d and angle θ. In this work, an offset value of 1 wa s used at four different angles (0°, 
45°, 90°, and 135°) to produce different SGLD matrices of 8 × 8 dimensions (assuming 8 scaled gray 
levels in the input image). Later on, the texture features of entropy, energy, correlation, inverse 
difference moment, inertia, sum average, sum entropy, sum variance, difference variance, difference 
average, and difference entropy were computed by averaging features from all the generated 
matrices [32]. 
  
Figure 6. Schematic workﬂow of the proposed gland segmentation method. Figure shows one glandular
region cropped from an image captured at 20× magniﬁcation.
4.2.1. Clustering of Tissue Components
Each image was divided into white, pink and purple clusters using the K-means algorithm.
A morphological operation of erosion was performed on the clusters.
4.2.2. Ellipse Fitting
An ellipse-ﬁtting algorithm [ 27] was used to identify purple-colored nuclei and white-colored
epithelial cell cytoplasm and glandular lumina.
4.2.3. Discrimination of True and False Glandular Components
To improve the ellipse-ﬁtting algorithm, hierarchical clustering was applied to discriminate
between true glands and false positives. Four co-centric ellipses of diﬀerent orientations were overlaid
on each detected object, and the following features were analyzed: (i) Total number of detected objects;
(ii) average Euclidean distance between the centers of objects; (iii) mean and standard deviation of
areas and compactness of objects; and (iv) ratio of purple area to white/pink area (for purple objects),
and ratio of white area to pink/purple cluster (for white objects). Hierarchical clustering, when applied
separately on the features of white and purple objects, divided the purple objects into two classes:
objects on the boundary of the glands (true cell nuclei) and false positive objects scattered within stroma.
Similarly, the clustering of the white objects divided the objects into true epithelial cell cytoplasm and
glandular lumina, and false positive white areas outside the gland.

Cancers 2019, 11, 1700 12 of 16
4.2.4. Lumen Detection
Following the identiﬁcation of epithelial cell cytoplasm and gland lumina in the previous step,
hierarchical clustering was applied to distinguish between the cytoplasm and lumen.
4.2.5. Formation of Internal Gland Regions
A morphological dilation of size 3 was applied on the lumen and epithelial cells in an iterative
manner until no nuclei got added to the dilated region.
4.2.6. Addition of Nuclei to the Internal Glandular Region
A geometrical, heuristic approach was adopted in order to add nuclei to the identiﬁed glandular
region containing lumina and epithelial cell cytoplasm. Radial lines were drawn from the center
of lumen to each boundary point of the internal glandular region, and were extended towards the
image boundary. The nuclei lying closest to the lumen on each radial line were considered candidate
boundary objects (shown in green).
4.2.7. Removal of False Nuclei
To remove false nuclei (shown in yellow), all the candidate boundary nuclei were clustered into
two classes (outliers and real boundary nuclei) by applying a hierarchical clustering method on features
extracted from each identiﬁed nucleus. In particular, the diﬀerence between Euclidean distance of a
certain nucleus and its 5 neighboring nuclei was used in hierarchical clustering to identify real nuclei.
4.2.8. Dilation of Nuclei
Once the boundary nuclei were identiﬁed, the inner gland regions were dilated until all the
voxels of all the boundary nuclei were added to the inner region, thereby constituting the complete
gland region.
To quantitatively measure the success of the obtained segmentation results, true+, false+, false–
and true– were calculated using the manual segmentation as the gold standard and then the sensitivity,
speciﬁcity, accuracy, dice similarity coeﬃcient and Jaccard Index were computed.
4.3. Features for Colon Cancer Detection/grading
For each image, we extracted multiple radiomic features captured at various scales, i.e., (i) image-,
(ii) gland-, and (iii) patch-based features, in order to capture various phenotypic characteristics of
the tumors.
4.3.1. Image-Based Features
The overall (global) texture of the images was quantiﬁed using Haralick texture features to
appreciate signiﬁcantly diﬀerent texture of normal and malignant colon tissues. These features were
computed from the Spatial Gray Level Dependence (SGLD) matrix constructed from the input image
as a whole. The SGLD matrix measures the frequency of co-occurrences of pairs of gray-levels at
certain oﬀset d and angle θ. In this work, an oﬀset value of 1 was used at four diﬀerent angles (0◦, 45◦,
90◦, and 135◦) to produce diﬀerent SGLD matrices of 8 × 8 dimensions (assuming 8 scaled gray levels
in the input image). Later on, the texture features of entropy, energy, correlation, inverse diﬀerence
moment, inertia, sum average, sum entropy, sum variance, diﬀerence variance, diﬀerence average,
and diﬀerence entropy were computed by averaging features from all the generated matrices [32].
4.3.2. Gland-Based Features
The structure and shape of individual glands, which signiﬁcantly vary between normal and
malignant colon tissues, was also quantiﬁed to better characterize the heterogeneity by selecting the
5 largest and 5 smallest glands (in terms of area). The features extracted from each gland include: (i)

Cancers 2019, 11, 1700 13 of 16
Std. deviation of distances of epithelial cells (white) and cell nuclei (purple) from lumen (Figure 7b,c).
The distances are computed from centroid of each object; (ii) Standard deviation of areas of epithelial
cells and cell nuclei; (iii) Ratio of the sizes of diﬀerent gland components (lumen, epithelial cells, nuclei)
to the total pixels of the gland, and the pair-wise ratio of all the gland components (Figure 7a); and (iv)
morphological features of area, compactness, convex area, eccentricity, Euler number, major- and
minor-axis length, orientation and perimeter [8].
Cancers 2019, 11, x FOR PEER REVIEW 13 of 16 
 
4.3.2. Gland-Based Features 
The structure and shape of individual glands, which significantly vary between normal and 
malignant colon tissues, was also quantified to better characterize the heterogeneity by selecting the 
5 largest and 5 smallest glands (in terms of area). The features extracted from each gland include: (i) 
Std. deviation of distances of epithelial cells (white) and cell nuclei (purple) from lumen (Figure 7b,c). 
The distances are computed from centroid of each object; (ii) Standard deviation of areas of epithelial 
cells and cell nuclei; (iii) Ratio of the sizes of di fferent gland components (l umen, epithelial cells, 
nuclei) to the total pixels of the gland, and the pair-wise ratio of all the gland components (Figure 7a); 
and (iv) morphological features of area, compactness, convex area, eccentricity, Euler number, major- 
and minor-axis length, orientation and perimeter [8]. 
   
(a) (b) (c) 
Figure 7. (a) A single normal colon gland with demarcated  lumen, epithelial cells and nuclei; area 
features are computed from epithelial cells, lumen and nuclei, (b) distance from the centroid of lumen 
to the centroid of each epithelial cell, ( c) distance from the centroid of lumen to the centroid of each 
cell nucleus. Figure shows one glandular region cropped from an image captured at 20× 
magnification. 
4.3.3. Patch-Based Features 
To extract an intermediate level of detail between the image- and gland-based features, the input 
image was divided into multiple patches of fixed sizes [33,34]. Random subsets of these patches were 
used to compute the same texture features as those of image-based features. 
4.4. Hierarchical Classification Framework  
Support vector machines, extensively used in the past in clinical studies [35,36], were used to 
construct various classifiers employed in a hierarch ical classification framework used in this study 
(Figure 2). In the first classification layer, patch-based features from subsets of patches were used to 
develop multiple weak classifiers based on the radial basis function (RBF) kernel of SVM. The 
probability estimate of the weak classifier (ProbabilityScore_2) with the highest confidence interval 
was used in the next step. The other individual features, i.e., image- and gland-based features, were 
directly classified by using the RBF kernel of SVM and the output probability estimates 
(ProbabilityScore_1 and ProbabilityScore_3) were used  in the next step. In the second classification 
layer, another ensemble classification model (meta-classification) was built using linear, RBF and 
sigmoid kernels of SVM as weak classifiers by using probability estimates (ProbabilityScore_1, 
ProbabilityScore_2, and ProbabilityScore_3) as features. The output of these weak classifiers was 
combined through majority voting providing the final classification. For all the classification 
experiments within each dataset, 10-fold cross-va lidation was used and system parameters were 
adjusted based on the training data using a grid search mechanism. For quantitative performance 
evaluation, multiple assessment measures were comp uted in order to validate the reliability of 
results. 
We have selected the top-most 5 features based on the weight assigned by the classifier, and 
compared the values of these features in normal and malignant groups. Boxplots of these features 
based on data from all the patients were created with the group type on x-axis and its value on y-axis 
Figure 7. (a) A single normal colon gland with demarcated lumen, epithelial cells and nuclei; area
features are computed from epithelial cells, lumen and nuclei, (b) distance from the centroid of lumen
to the centroid of each epithelial cell, (c) distance from the centroid of lumen to the centroid of each cell
nucleus. Figure shows one glandular region cropped from an image captured at 20× magniﬁcation.
4.3.3. Patch-Based Features
To extract an intermediate level of detail between the image- and gland-based features, the input
image was divided into multiple patches of ﬁxed sizes [ 33,34]. Random subsets of these patches were
used to compute the same texture features as those of image-based features.
4.4. Hierarchical Classiﬁcation Framework
Support vector machines, extensively used in the past in clinical studies [ 35,36], were used to
construct various classiﬁers employed in a hierarchical classiﬁcation framework used in this study
(Figure 2). In the ﬁrst classiﬁcation layer, patch-based features from subsets of patches were used
to develop multiple weak classiﬁers based on the radial basis function (RBF) kernel of SVM. The
probability estimate of the weak classiﬁer (ProbabilityScore_2) with the highest conﬁdence interval was
used in the next step. The other individual features, i.e., image- and gland-based features, were directly
classiﬁed by using the RBF kernel of SVM and the output probability estimates (ProbabilityScore_1
and ProbabilityScore_3) were used in the next step. In the second classiﬁcation layer, another
ensemble classiﬁcation model (meta-classiﬁcation) was built using linear, RBF and sigmoid kernels
of SVM as weak classiﬁers by using probability estimates (ProbabilityScore_1, ProbabilityScore_2,
and ProbabilityScore_3) as features. The output of these weak classiﬁers was combined through
majority voting providing the ﬁnal classiﬁcation. For all the classiﬁcation experiments within each
dataset, 10-fold cross-validation was used and system parameters were adjusted based on the training
data using a grid search mechanism. For quantitative performance evaluation, multiple assessment
measures were computed in order to validate the reliability of results.
We have selected the top-most 5 features based on the weight assigned by the classiﬁer, and
compared the values of these features in normal and malignant groups. Boxplots of these features
based on data from all the patients were created with the group type on x-axis and its value on y-axis
(Figure 5). The p-values were then calculated using Wilcoxin rank test [ 37], and corrected using
Bonferroni correction [38].

Cancers 2019, 11, 1700 14 of 16
5. Conclusions
We present here an ensemble classiﬁcation framework based on robust image features for accurate
colon cancer detection and grading. The proposed methodology was validated both within and
between two colon cancer datasets by investigating the performance of individual as well as ensemble
classiﬁers. Our results show that the ensemble classiﬁcation methodology produces robust classiﬁcation
and reinforces the performance of individual classiﬁers by a signiﬁcant margin. The reliability of the
proposed methodology between the two datasets suggests broader applicability across diverse clinical
settings. With further prospective validation, our method may prove to be a useful tool to quickly,
accurately, and reproducibly analyze colon cancer specimens.
Author Contributions: Conceptualization, S.R.; Data curation, S.R.; Formal analysis, S.R., M.A.I., A.C., and T.K.;
Methodology, S.R.; Project administration, S.R.; Resources, S.R.; Software, S.R.; Supervision, T.N., M.B.; Validation,
S.R., M.A.I., and A.C.; Writing—original draft, S.R.; Writing—review and editing, S.R., M.A.I., A.C., T.K., M.B,
and T.N.
Funding: This dataset received no external funding.
Conﬂicts of Interest: The authors declare no conﬂict of interests.
References
1. Cross, S.E.; Jin, Y.S.; Rao, J.; Gimzewski, J.K. Nanomechanical analysis of cells from cancer patients.
Nat. Nanotechnol. 2007, 2, 780–783. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
2. Backes, Y.; Moons, L.M.; Novelli, M.R.; van Bergeijk, J.D.; Groen, J.N.; Seerden, T.C.; Schwartz, M.P .; de
Vos Tot Nederveen Cappel, W.H.; Spanier, B.W.; Geesing, J.M.; et al. Diagnosis of T1 colorectal cancer
in pedunculated polyps in daily clinical practice: A multicenter study. Mod. Pathol. 2017, 30, 104–112.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
3. Rathore, S.; Iftikhar, M.A.; Hussain, M.; Jalil, A. Classiﬁcation of colon biopsy images based on novel
structural features. In Proceedings of the 2013 IEEE 9th International Conference on Emerging Technologies
(ICET), Islamabad, Pakistan, 9–10 December 2013; pp. 1–6.
4. Doyle, S.; Madabhushi, A.; Feldman, M.; Tomaszeweski, J. A boosting cascade for automated detection of
prostate cancer from digitized histology. Med. Image Comput. Comput. Assist. Interv. 2006, 9 Pt 2, 504–511.
5. Khan, A.M.; Rajpoot, N.; Treanor, D.; Magee, D. A nonlinear mapping approach to stain normalization in
digital histopathology images using image-speciﬁc color deconvolution. IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng. 2014, 61,
1729–1738. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
6. Gurcan, M.N.; Boucheron, L.E.; Can, A.; Madabhushi, A.; Rajpoot, N.M.; Yener, B. Histopathological image
analysis: A review. IEEE Rev. Biomed. Eng. 2009, 2, 147–171. [CrossRef]
7. Rathore, S.; Hussain, M.; Ali, A.; Khan, A. A recent survey on colon cancer detection techniques. IEEE/ACM
Trans. Comput. Biol. Bioinform. 2013, 10, 545–563. [CrossRef]
8. Rathore, S.; Hussain, M.; Khan, A. Automated colon cancer detection using hybrid of novel geometric
features and some traditional features. Comput. Biol. Med. 2015, 65, 279–296. [CrossRef]
9. Altunbay, D.; Cigir, C.; Sokmensuer, C.; Gunduz-Demir, C. Color graphs for automated cancer diagnosis and
grading. IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng. 2010, 57, 665–674. [CrossRef]
10. Ozdemir, E.; Gunduz-Demir, C. A hybrid classiﬁcation model for digital pathology using structural and
statistical pattern recognition. IEEE Trans. Med. Imaging 2013, 32, 474–483. [CrossRef]
11. Rathore, S.; Hussain, M.; Iftikhar, M.A.; Jalil, A. Novel structural descriptors for automated colon cancer
detection and grading. Comput. Methods Progr. Biomed. 2015, 121, 92–108. [CrossRef]
12. Chaddad, A.; Daniel, P .; Niazi, T. Radiomics Evaluation of Histological Heterogeneity Using Multiscale
Textures Derived From 3D Wavelet Transformation of Multispectral Images. Front. Oncol. 2018, 8, 96.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
13. Haj-Hassan, H.; Chaddad, A.; Harkouss, Y.; Desrosiers, C.; Toews, M.; Tanougast, C. Classiﬁcations of
Multispectral Colorectal Cancer Tissues Using Convolution Neural Network. J. Pathol. Inform. 2017, 8, 1.
[PubMed]
14. Chaddad, A.; Tanougast, C. Texture Analysis of Abnormal Cell Images for Predicting the Continuum of
Colorectal Cancer. Anal. Cell Pathol. 2017, 2017, 8428102. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

Cancers 2019, 11, 1700 15 of 16
15. Ronneberger, O.; Fischer, P .; Brox, T. U-Net: Convolutional Networks for Biomedical Image Segmentation.
arXiv 2015, arXiv:1505.04597.
16. Gunduz-Demir, C.; Kandemir, M.; Tosun, A.B.; Sokmensuer, C. Automatic segmentation of colon glands
using object-graphs. Med. Image Anal. 2010, 14, 1–12. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
17. Graham, S.; Chen, H.; Gamper, J.; Dou, Q.; Heng, P .-A.; Snead, D.; Tsang, Y.W.; Rajpoot, N. MILD-Net:
Minimal Information Loss Dilated Network for Gland Instance Segmentation in Colon Histology Images.
Med. Image Anal. 2019, 52, 199–211. [CrossRef]
18. Kainz, P .; Pfeiﬀer, M.; Urschler, M. Semantic Segmentation of Colon Glands with Deep Convolutional Neural
Networks and Total Variation Segmentation. arXiv 2015, arXiv:1511.06919.
19. Fu, H.; Qiu, G.; Shu, J.; Ilyas, M. A novel polar space random ﬁeld model for the detection of glandular
structures. IEEE Trans. Med. Imaging 2014, 33, 764–776. [CrossRef]
20. Li, W.; Manivannan, S.; Akbar, S.; Zhang, J.; Trucco, E.; McKenna, S.J. Gland segmentation in colon histology
images using hand-crafted features and convolutional neural networks. In Proceedings of the 2016 IEEE
13th International Symposium on Biomedical Imaging (ISBI), Prague, Czech Republic, 13–16 April 2016.
21. Chen, H.; Qi, X.; Yu, L.; Dou, Q.; Qin, J.; Heng, P .A. DCAN: Deep contour-aware networks for object instance
segmentation from histology images. Med. Image Anal. 2017, 36, 135–146. [CrossRef]
22. Masood, K.; Rajpoot, N. Texture based classiﬁcation of hyperspectral colon biopsy samples using CLBP . In
Proceedings of the IEEE International Symposium on Biomedical Imaging: From Nano to Macro, Boston,
MA, USA, 28 June–1 July 2009; pp. 1011–1014.
23. Rathore, S.; Hussain, M.; Iftikhar, M.A.; Jalil, A. Ensemble classiﬁcation of colon biopsy images based on
information rich hybrid features. Comput. Biol. Med. 2014, 47, 76–92. [CrossRef]
24. Awan, R.; Sirinukunwattana, K.; Epstein, D.; Je ﬀeryes, S.; Qidwai, U.; Aftab, Z.; Mujeeb, I.; Snead, D.;
Rajpoot, N. Glandular Morphometrics for Objective Grading of Colorectal Adenocarcinoma Histology
Images. Sci. Rep. 2017, 7, 16852. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
25. Chaddad, A.; Tanougast, C.; Golato, A.; Dandache, A. Carcinoma cell identiﬁcation via optical microscopy
and shape feature analysis. J. Biomed. Sci. Eng. 2013, 6, 1029–1033. [CrossRef]
26. Rathore, S.; Hussain, M.; Khan, A. GECC: Gene Expression Based Ensemble Classiﬁcation of Colon Samples.
IEEE/ACM Trans. Comput. Biol. Bioinform. 2014, 11, 1131–1145. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
27. Rathore, S.; Iftikhar, M.A. CBISC: A Novel Approach for Colon Biopsy Image Segmentation and Classiﬁcation.
Arab. J. Sci. Eng. 2016, 41, 5061–5076. [CrossRef]
28. Tommelein, J.; Verset, L.; Boterberg, T.; Demetter, P .; Bracke, M.; de Wever, O. Cancer-associated ﬁbroblasts
connect metastasis-promoting communication in colorectal cancer. Front. Oncol. 2015, 5, 63. [CrossRef]
29. Becht, E.; de Reynies, A.; Giraldo, N.A.; Pilati, C.; Buttard, B.; Lacroix, L.; Selves, J.; Sautes-Fridman, C.;
Laurent-Puig, P .; Fridman, W.H. Immune and Stromal Classiﬁcation of Colorectal Cancer Is Associated
with Molecular Subtypes and Relevant for Precision Immunotherapy. Clin. Cancer Res. 2016, 22, 4057–4066.
[CrossRef]
30. Sirinukunwattana, K.; Pluim, J.P .; Chen, H.; Qi, X.; Heng, P .A.; Guo, Y.B.; Wang, L.Y.; Matuszewski, B.J.;
Bruni, E.; Sanchez, U.; et al. Gland segmentation in colon histology images: The glas challenge contest. Med.
Image Anal. 2017, 35, 489–502. [CrossRef]
31. Sirinukunwattana, K.; Snead, D.R.; Rajpoot, N.M. A Stochastic Polygons Model for Glandular Structures in
Colon Histology Images. IEEE Trans. Med. Imaging 2015, 34, 2366–2378. [CrossRef]
32. Haralick, R.M.; Shanmugam, K.; Dinstein, I.H. Textural features for image classiﬁcation. IEEE Trans. Syst.
Man Cybern. 1973, 3, 610–621. [CrossRef]
33. Liu, M.; Zhang, D.; Shen, D. Semble sparse classiﬁcation of Alzheimer disease.Neuroimage 2012, 60, 1106–1116.
[CrossRef]
34. Rathore, S.; Iftikhar, M.A.; Hassan, M. Ensemble Sparse Classiﬁcation of Colon Cancer. In Proceedings
of the 2016 International Conference on Frontiers of Information Technology (FIT), Islamabad, Pakistan,
19–21 December 2016.
35. Fujima, N.; Shimizu, Y.; Yoshida, D.; Kano, S.; Mizumachi, T.; Homma, A.; Yasuda, K.; Onimaru, R.; Sakai, O.;
Kudo, K.; et al. Machine-Learning-Based Prediction of Treatment Outcomes Using MR Imaging-Derived
Quantitative Tumor Information in Patients with Sinonasal Squamous Cell Carcinomas: A Preliminary Study.
Cancers 2019, 11, 800. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

Cancers 2019, 11, 1700 16 of 16
36. Rehman, O.; Zhuang, H.; Ali, A.M.; Ibrahim, A.; Li, Z. Validation of miRNAs as Breast Cancer Biomarkers
with a Machine Learning Approach. Cancers 2019, 11, 431. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
37. Wilcoxon, F. Individual comparisons by ranking methods. Biom. Bull. 1945, 1, 80–83. [CrossRef]
38. Dunn, O.J. Estimation of the Means for Dependent Variables.Ann. Math. Stat. 1958, 29, 1095–1111. [CrossRef]
© 2019 by the authors. Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland. This article is an open access
article distributed under the terms and conditions of the Creative Commons Attribution
(CC BY) license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).