Boundary loss for highly unbalanced segmentation
Hoel Kervadeca,˚, Jihene Bouchtibaa, Christian Desrosiers a, Eric Granger a,
Jose Dolza, Ismail Ben Ayed a,b
a ´ETS Montr´ eal, Canada
bCRCHUM (University of Montreal Hospital Centre), Canada
Abstract
Widely used loss functions for CNN segmentation, e.g., Dice or cross-entropy,
are based on integrals over the segmentation regions. Unfortunately, for highly
unbalanced segmentations, such regional summations have values that diﬀer by
several orders of magnitude across classes, which aﬀects training performance
and stability. We propose a boundary loss, which takes the form of a distance
metric on the space of contours, not regions. This can mitigate the diﬃculties
of highly unbalanced problems because it uses integrals over the interface be-
tween regions instead of unbalanced integrals over the regions. Furthermore,
a boundary loss complements regional information. Inspired by graph-based
optimization techniques for computing active-contour ﬂows, we express a non-
symmetric L2 distance on the space of contours as a regional integral, which
avoids completely local diﬀerential computations involving contour points. This
yields a boundary loss expressed with the regional softmax probability outputs
of the network, which can be easily combined with standard regional losses and
implemented with any existing deep network architecture for N-D segmentation.
We report comprehensive evaluations and comparisons on diﬀerent unbalanced
problems, showing that our boundary loss can yield signiﬁcant increases in per-
formances while improving training stability. Our code is publicly available 1.
Keywords: Boundary loss, unbalanced data, semantic segmentation, deep
learning, CNN
1. Introduction
Recent years have witnessed a substantial growth in the number of deep
learning methods for medical image segmentation [1, 2, 3, 4]. Widely used loss
functions for segmentation, e.g., Dice or cross-entropy, are based on regional
integrals, which are convenient for training deep neural networks. In practice,
these regional integrals are summations over the segmentation regions of dif-
ferentiable functions, each directly invoking the softmax probability outputs
˚Corresponding author: hoel@kervadec.science
1https://github.com/LIVIAETS/surface-loss
arXiv:1812.07032v4  [eess.IV]  17 Oct 2020

(a) Ground truth
 (b) GDL
 (c) GDL + boundary loss
Figure 1: A visual comparison that shows the positive eﬀect of our boundary loss on
a validation data from the WMH dataset. Our boundary loss helped to recover small
regions that were otherwise missed by the model trained with the generalized Dice loss
(GDL). Best viewed in colors.
of the network. Therefore, standard stochastic optimizers such as SGD are
directly applicable. Unfortunately, diﬃculties occur for highly unbalanced seg-
mentations, for instance, when the size of target foreground region is several
orders of magnitude less than the background size. For example, in the charac-
terization of white matter hyperintensities (WMH) of presumed vascular origin,
the foreground composed of WMH regions may be 500 times smaller than the
background (see the typical example in Fig. 1). In such cases, quite common in
medical image analysis, standard regional losses contain foreground and back-
ground terms with values that diﬀer considerably, typically by several orders of
magnitude, potentially aﬀecting performance and training stability [5, 6].
Segmentation approaches based on convolutional neural networks (CNN)
are typically trained by minimizing the cross-entropy (CE), which measures
an aﬃnity between the regions deﬁned by probability softmax outputs of the
network and the corresponding ground-truth regions. The standard regional
CE has well-known drawbacks in the context of highly unbalanced problems.
It assumes identical importance distribution of all the samples and classes. To
achieve good generalization, it requires a large training set with balanced classes.
For unbalanced data, CE typically results in unstable training and leads to deci-
sion boundaries biased towards the majority classes. Class-imbalanced learning
aims to mitigate learning bias by promoting the importance of infrequent labels.
In medical image segmentation, a common strategy is to re-balance class prior
distributions by down-sampling frequent labels [7, 8]. Nevertheless, this strategy
limits the information of the images used for training. Another common prac-
tice is to assign weights to the diﬀerent classes that are inversely proportional
to the frequency of the corresponding labels [9, 10, 11, 12, 13]. In this scenario,
the standard cross-entropy (CE) loss is modiﬁed so as to assign more impor-
tance to the rare labels. Although eﬀective for some unbalanced problems, such
weighting methods may undergo serious diﬃculties when dealing with highly
unbalanced datasets, as seen with WMH segmentation. The CE gradient com-
puted over the few pixels of infrequent labels is typically noisy, and amplifying
2

this noise with a high class weight may lead to instability.
The well-known Dice overlap coeﬃcient was also adopted as a regional loss
function, typically outperforming CE in unbalanced medical image segmentation
problems [5, 14, 15]. Sudre et al. [6] generalized the Dice loss [5] by weighting
according to the squared inverse of class-label frequency. Despite these improve-
ments over CE [5, 6], regional Dice losses may encounter diﬃculties when dealing
with very small structures. In such highly unbalanced scenarios, mis-classiﬁed
pixels may lead to large decreases of the loss, resulting in unstable optimiza-
tion. Furthermore, Dice corresponds to the harmonic mean between precision
and recall, implicitly using the arithmetic mean of false positives and false nega-
tives. False positives and false negatives are, therefore, equally important when
the true positives remain the same, making this loss mainly appropriate when
both types of errors are equally high. The recent research in [16, 17] investi-
gated losses based on the Tversky similarity index in order to provide a better
trade-oﬀ between precision and recall. It introduced two parameters that con-
trol the importance of false positives and false negatives. Other recent advances
in class-imbalanced learning for computer vision problems have been adopted
in medical image segmentation. For example, inspired by the concept of focal
loss [18], Dice and Tvserky losses have been extended to integrate a focal term,
which is parameterized by a value that controls the importance of easy and
hard training samples [17, 15]. Furthermore, the combination of several of these
regional losses has been further investigated [19]. The main objective of these
losses is to balance the classes not only in terms of their relative class sizes, but
also by the level of segmentation diﬃculty.
More recently, Karimi et al. [20] proposed a novel loss function that at-
tempts to directly reduce the Hausdorﬀ distance (HD). This relaxed loss based
on the HD is shown to bring improvements when combined with the DSC loss.
Nevertheless, its main drawback is the high computational cost of computing
the distance transforms. Particularly, at each training epoch, the new distance
maps have to be recomputed for all the images, which incurs in a computation-
ally costly process. This issue is further magniﬁed in the case of 3D volumes,
which heavily increases the computational burden.
Contributions
In this paper, we propose a boundary loss that takes the form of a distance
metric on the space of contours (or shapes), not regions. We argue that a
boundary loss can mitigate the issues related to regional losses in highly un-
balanced segmentation problems. Rather than using unbalanced integrals over
the regions, a boundary loss uses integrals over the boundary (interface) be-
tween the regions. Furthermore, it provides information that is complementary
to regional losses. It is, however, challenging to represent the boundary points
corresponding to the regional softmax outputs of a CNN. This diﬃculty may
explain why boundary losses have been avoided in the context of deep seg-
mentation networks. Our boundary loss is inspired by techniques in discrete
graph-based optimization for computing gradient ﬂows of curve evolution [21].
Following an integral approach for computing boundary variations, we express
3

a non-symmetric L2 distance on the space of shapes (or contours) as a regional
integral, which avoids completely local diﬀerential computations involving con-
tour points. This yields a boundary loss expressed as the sum of linear functions
of the regional softmax probability outputs of the network. Therefore, it can
be easily combined with standard regional losses and implemented with any
existing deep network architecture for N-D segmentation.
We evaluated our boundary loss in conjunction with various region-based
losses on two challenging and highly unbalanced segmentation problems – the
Ischemic Stroke Lesion (ISLES) and the White Matter Hyperintensities (WMH)
benchmark datasets. The results indicate that the proposed boundary loss yields
a more stable learning process, and can bring signiﬁcant gains in performances,
in terms of Dice and Hausdorﬀ scores.
2. F ormulation
Let I : ΩĂ R2,3Ñ R denotes a training image with spatial domain Ω, and
g : Ω Ñ t0, 1u a binary ground-truth segmentation of the image: gppq “1 if
pixel/voxel p belongs to the target region G Ă Ω (foreground region) and 0
otherwise, i.e., pP ΩzG (background region)2. Let sθ : Ω Ñr 0, 1s denotes the
softmax probability output of a deep segmentation network, and Sθ Ă Ω the
corresponding segmentation region: Sθ“tpP Ω|sθppqě δu for some threshold
δ. Widely used segmentation loss functions involve a regional integral for each
segmentation region in Ω, which measures some similarity (or overlap) between
the region deﬁned by the probability outputs of the network and the correspond-
ing ground-truth. In the two-region case, we have an integral of the general formş
Ωgppqfpsθppqqdp for the foreground, and of the form
ş
Ωp1´gppqqfp1´sθppqqdp
for the background. For instance, the standard two-region cross-entropy loss
corresponds to a summation of these two terms for f “´ logp¨q. Similarly, the
generalized Dice loss (GDL) [6] involves regional integrals with f “ 1, subject
to some normalization, and is given as follows for the two-region case:
LGDLpθq“ 1´ 2
wG
ş
pPΩgppqsθppqdp`wB
ş
pPΩp1´gppqqp1´sθppqqdp
wG
ş
Ωrsθppq` gppqsdp`wB
ş
Ωr2´sθppq´ gppqsdp (1)
where coeﬃcients wG “ 1{
´ş
pPΩgppqdp
¯2
and wB “ 1{
`ş
Ωp1´gppqqdp
˘2
are
introduced to reduce the well-known correlation between the Dice overlap and
region size.
Regional integrals are widely used because they are convenient for training
deep segmentation networks. In practice, these regional integrals are summa-
tions of diﬀerentiable functions, each invoking directly the softmax probabil-
ity outputs of the network, sθppq. Therefore, standard stochastic optimizers
2We focus on two-region segmentation to simplify the presentation. However, our formu-
lation extends to the multi-region case in a straightforward manner.
4

(a) Diﬀerential
 (b) Integral
Figure 2: The relationship between diﬀerential and integral approaches for evaluating
boundary change (variation).
such SGD are directly applicable. Unfortunately, extremely unbalanced seg-
mentations are quite common in medical image analysis, where, e.g., the size
of the target foreground region is several orders of magnitude smaller than the
background size. This represents challenging cases because the foreground and
background terms have substantial diﬀerences in their values, which aﬀects seg-
mentation performance and training stability [5, 6].
Our purpose is to build a boundary loss Dist pBG,BSθq, which takes the
form of a distance metric on the space of contours (or region boundaries) in
Ω, with BG denoting a representation of the boundary of ground-truth region
G (e.g., the set of points of G, which have a spatial neighbor in background
ΩzG) andBSθ denoting the boundary of the segmentation region deﬁned by the
network output. On the one hand, a boundary loss should be able to mitigate
the above-mentioned diﬃculties for unbalanced segmentations: rather than us-
ing unbalanced integrals within the regions, it uses integrals over the boundary
(interface) between the regions. Furthermore, a boundary loss provides infor-
mation that is diﬀerent from and, therefore, complimentary to regional losses.
On the other hand, it is not clear how to represent boundary points on BSθ as
a diﬀerentiable function of regional network outputs sθ. This diﬃculty might
explain why boundary losses have been mostly avoided in the context of deep
segmentation networks.
Our boundary loss is inspired from discrete (graph-based) optimization tech-
niques for computing gradient ﬂows of curve evolution [21]. Similarly to our
problem, curve evolution methods require a measure for evaluating boundary
changes (or variations). Consider the following non-symmetric L2 distance on
the space of shapes, which evaluates the change between two nearby boundaries
BS andBG [21]:
DistpBG,BSq“
ż
BG
}yBSppq´ p}2dp (2)
where pP Ω is a point on boundary BG and yBSppq denotes the corresponding
5

point on boundary BS, along the direction normal to BG, i.e., yBSppq is the
intersection of BS and the line that is normal to BG at p (See Fig. 2.a for an
illustration) }.} denotes the L2 norm. In fact, this diﬀerential framework for
evaluating boundary change is in line with standard variational curve evolution
methods [22], which compute the motion of each point p on the evolving curve
as a velocity along the normal to the curve at point p. Similarly to any contour
distance invoking directly points on contour BS, expression (2) cannot be used
directly as a loss for BS“BSθ. However, it is easy to show that the diﬀerential
boundary variation in (2) can be approximated using an integral approach [21],
which avoids completely local diﬀerential computations involving contour points
and represents boundary change as a regional integral:
DistpBG,BSq« 2
ż
∆S
DGpqqdq (3)
where ∆S denotes the region between the two contours and DG : ΩÑ R` is a
distance map with respect to boundary BG, i.e., DGpqq evaluates the distance
between pointqP Ω and the nearest point zBGpqq on contourBG: DGpqq“} q´
zBGpqq}. Fig. 2.b illustrates this integral framework for evaluating the boundary
distance in Eq. (2). To clarify approximation (3), notice that integrating the
distance map 2DGpqq over the normal segment connecting a point p onBG and
yBSppq yields}yBSppq´ p}2, via the following variable change:
żyBSppq
p
2DGpqqdq“
ż}yBSppq´p}
0
2DGdDG“}yBSppq´ p}2
Thus, from approximation (3), the non-symmetricL2 distance between contours
in Eq. (2) can be expressed as a sum of regional integrals based on a level set
representation of boundary BG:
1
2DistpBG,BSq“
ż
S
φGpqqdq´
ż
G
φGpqqdq“
ż
Ω
φGpqqspqqdq´
ż
Ω
φGpqqgpqqdq
(4)
where s : Ω Ñ t0, 1u is binary indicator function of region S: spqq “ 1 if
qPS belongs to the target and 0 otherwise. φG : ΩÑ R denotes the level set
representation of boundary BG: φGpqq“´ DGpqq if qPG and φGpqq“ DGpqq
otherwise. Now, for S“ Sθ, i.e., replacing binary variables spqq in Eq. (4) by
the softmax probability outputs of the network sθpqq, we obtain the following
boundary loss which, up to a constant independent ofθ, approximates boundary
distance DistpBG,BSθq:
LBpθq“
ż
Ω
φGpqqsθpqqdq (5)
Notice that we omitted the last term in Eq. (4) as it is independent of network
parameters. The level set functionφG is pre-computed directly from the ground-
truth region G. In practice, our boundary loss in Eq. (5) is the sum of linear
6

functions of the regional softmax probability outputs of the network. Therefore,
it can be easily combined with standard regional losses ( LR) and implemented
with any existing deep network architecture for N-D segmentation:
LRpθq` αLBpθq, (6)
where αP R is a parameter balancing the two losses.
It is worth noting that our boundary loss uses ground-truth boundary infor-
mation via pre-computed level-set function φGpqq, which encodes the distance
between each point q and BG. In Eq. (5), the softmax for each point q is
weighted by the distance function. Such distance-to-boundary information is
omitted in widely used regional losses, where all the points within a given re-
gion are treated equally, independently of their distances from the boundary.
Notice that the global minimum (smallest possible value) of our boundary
loss (5) is reached when all the negative values in the distance function are in-
cluded in the sum (i.e., the softmax predictions for the pixels within the ground-
truth foreground are equal to 1) and all the positive values are omitted (i.e., the
softmax predictions within the background are equal to zero). This means that
the global optimum is reached for softmax predictions that correspond exactly
to the ground truth, which conﬁrms the meaningfulness of our boundary loss. It
is also worth noticing that the gradient of our loss is φG multiplied the gradient
of the softmax predictions. This results in negative factors for the pixels in G,
which encourages sθ to increase during SGD, with the magnitude (strength) of
the factors depending on the distance between the pixel and the ground-truth
boundary (the further the pixel from the boundary, the higher the magnitude of
the factor). Positive factors for pixels within the background (Ω zG) encourage
the softmax predictions to decrease.
As we will see in our experiments, it is important to use our boundary
loss in conjunction with a regional loss for the following technical facts. As
discussed earlier, the global optimum of our boundary loss corresponds to a
strictly negative value, with the softmax probabilities yielding a non-empty
foreground region. However, an empty foreground, with approximately null
values of the softmax probabilities almost everywhere, corresponds to very low
gradients. Therefore, this trivial solution is close to a local minimum or a
saddle point. This is why we integrate our boundary loss with a regional loss:
the regional loss guides training during the ﬁrst epochs and avoids getting stuck
in such trivial solutions. In the next section, we will discuss various scheduling
strategies for updating the weight of the boundary loss during training, with the
boundary loss becoming very dominant, almost acting alone, towards the end
of the training process. It is also worth noting that this behaviour of boundary
terms is conceptually similar to the behaviour of classical and popular contour-
based energies for segmentation, e.g., level set Geodesic Active Contours (GAC)
[23] or discrete Markov Random Fields (MRFs) for boundary regularization and
edge alignment [24], which require additional regional terms to avoid trivial
empty-region solutions.
7

3. Experiments
In this section, we perform two sets of experiments. First, we perform
comprehensive evaluations demonstrating to positive eﬀect of integrating our
boundary loss with diﬀerent regional losses LR. Then, we perform a study on
the diﬀerent strategies for selecting and scheduling weight α in (6), showing its
impact on performances and good default values for new applications.
3.1. Datasets
To evaluate the proposed boundary loss, we selected two challenging brain
lesion segmentation tasks, each corresponding to highly unbalanced classes.
ISLES:. The training dataset provided by the ISLES organizers is composed
of 94 ischemic stroke lesion multi-modal scans. In our experiments, we split
this dataset into training and validation sets containing 74 and 20 examples,
respectively. Each scan contains Diﬀusion maps (DWI) and Perfusion maps
(CBF, MTT, CBV, Tmax and CTP source data), as well as the manual ground-
truth segmentation. The spatial resolution goes from 0 .8mmˆ 0.8mmˆ 4mm
to 1mmˆ 1mmˆ 12mm. More details can be found in the ISLES website 3.
WMH:. The public dataset of the White Matter Hyperintensities (WMH) 4
MICCAI 2017 challenge contains 60 3D T1-weighted scans and 2D multi-slice
FLAIR acquired from multiple vendors and scanners in three diﬀerent hospitals.
The spatial resolution goes from 0.95mmˆ0.95mmˆ3mm to 1.21mmˆ1mmˆ
3mm for each volume. In addition, the ground truth for the 60 scans is pro-
vided. From the whole set, 50 scans were used for training, and the remaining
10 for validation.
3.2. Compared losses
As stated previously, our proposed boundary loss can be combined with
any standard regional loss. In the following experiments, we evaluated diﬀerent
popular ones:
GDL. [6] We use the binary case of this loss, described in Equation (1). This
is also the baseline loss that we use for the experiments on the selection of α.
An important advantage of this loss is that it is hyper-parameter free.
3http://www.isles-challenge.org
4http://wmh.isi.uu.nl
8

Distance weighted cross-entropy . [10] UNet original paper proposed this
loss as a way to integrate spatial information during the training. It is a modiﬁed
weighted cross-entropy loss, where the weight for each pixel depends both on
the class distribution, and its distance to the two cells closest boundaries. We
adapted it for our case, where we take into account only one distance:
LUNETpθq“´
ż
C
ż
Ω
ucppq logsc
θppqdpdc,
where C is the set of classes and sc
θppq are the network predictions for class c.
ucppq is deﬁned as:
ucppq“ gcppq
„
wc`w0e
´DGppq2
2σ2

,
where wc “
ş
Ωgcppqdp
|Ω| , and w0 “ 10 and σ“ 5 are two hyper-parameters. We
kept the paper’s default values.
Focal loss. [18] The idea of this loss is to give hard examples a more important
weight:
LFOCAL“´
ż
C
ż
Ω
p1´sc
θppqqγgcppq logsc
θppqdpdc,
with γ“ 2 as default hyper-parameter. Therefore, during training, pixels cor-
rectly classiﬁed with a high conﬁdence will have little to no inﬂuence.
Hausdorﬀ loss . [20] This closely related loss is also designed to minimize
some distance between the two boundaries, but through a diﬀerent path. We
refer to this loss as LHD.
LHD “
ż
Ω
pgppq´ sθppqq2pDGppqβ`DSppqβqdp,
where DS denotes the distance function from predicted boundary S, after
thresholding sθ. β is a hyper-parameter, which the authors of [20] set to 2
following a grid search. Unlike our boundary loss, computing DS cannot be
done in a single step before training. The distance needs to be re-computed
at each epoch during training, for all the images. It also requires to store the
whole volume Ω in memory, as we cannot compute the distance map for only a
subset of Ω. These might be important computational and memory limitations,
more so when dealing with large images, as is the case for 3D distance maps.
3.3. 2D and 3D distance maps
While the main experiments resort to a distance map computed from each
individual 2D slice, we evaluate the proposed boundary loss with a distance map
computed from the whole initial 3D segmentation mask. Equation (5) enables
us to have only a subset of Ω at each update, making it possible to use a 3D
distance map with mini-batches of 2D slices.
9

3.4. Selection of α
We study several strategies for selectingα, and its eﬀect on the performances.
On top of a constant pre-selected α, we evaluated simple scheduling strategies
to update it during the training.
Constantα. The simplest method would be to use a constant during the whole
training, but this might require careful tuning of its value.
Increase α. We start with a low value of αą 0, and increase it gradually at
the end of each epoch. The weight of the regional loss LR remains constant over
time. At the end of the training, the two losses have the same weight.
Rebalanceα. First we rewrite our combined loss as p1´αqLR`αLB. As for
the increase strategy, we start with a low αą 0, and increase it over time. In
this way, we give more importance to the regional loss term at the beginning
while gradually increasing the impact of the boundary loss term. Note that we
make sure that the weight for LR never reaches 0; the two losses are used at all
times during training.
3.5. Implementation details
Data pre-processing. While the scans are provided as 3D images, we process
them as a stack of independent 2D images, which are fed into the network.
In fact, the scans in some datasets, such as ISLES, contain between 2 and 16
slices, making them ill-suited for 3D convolutions in those cases. The scans were
normalized between 0 and 1 before being saved as a set of 2D matrices, and re-
scaled to 256ˆ256 pixels if needed. When several modalities were available, all
of them were concatenated before being used as input to the network. We did
not use any data augmentation in our experiments.
Architecture and training. We employed UNet [10] as deep learning archi-
tecture in our experiments. To train our model, we employed Adam optimizer,
with a learning rate of 0 .001 and a batch size equal to 8. The learning rate is
halved if the validation performances do not improve during 20 epochs. We did
not use early stopping.
To compute the level set function φG in Eq. (5), we used standard SciPy
functions5. Note that, for slices containing only the background region, we
used a zero-distance map, assuming that the regional loss is suﬃcient in those
cases. For the increase and rebalance α scheduling strategies, we start with
α“ 0.01 and increase it by 0 .01 at the end of each epoch. For all the experi-
ments comparing diﬀerent losses, we use the same rebalance strategy, with the
same hyper-parameters. In addition, we evaluated the performance when the
boundary loss is the only objective, i.e., α“ 0.
5https://docs.scipy.org/doc/scipy-0.14.0/reference/generated/scipy.ndimage.
morphology.distance_transform_edt.html
10

For our implementation, we used PyTorch [25], and ran the experiments
on a machine equipped with an NVIDIA GTX 1080 Ti GPU with 11GBs of
memory. Our code (data pre-processing, training and testing scripts) is publicly
available6. As [20] did not release their code, we relied on the re-implementation
from [26]7.
Evaluation. For evaluation purposes, we employ the common Dice Similarity
Coeﬃcient (DSC) and modiﬁed Hausdorﬀ Distance 8 (HD95) metrics.
3.6. Results
3.6.1. Comparison of regional losses
In this section, we detail the results that we obtained when using diﬀerent
regional losses LR.
Quantative evaluation . Table 1 reports the DSC and HD performances for
our experiments using four diﬀerent choices of LR, with each regional term
used either alone or in conjunction with our boundary loss in Eq. (6), on
the ISLES and WMH datasets. In most of the settings, adding the boundary
loss during training improves the performances, as reﬂected in the signiﬁcantly
better DSC and HD values. For instance, on the ISLES segmentation task,
adding the boundary loss yielded about 13% improvement in DSC over using
Generalized Dice loss alone, and about 3% improvement over using UNet cross-
entropy or focal loss alone. The discrepancy of the improvements the boundary
loss brings might be due to the diﬀerence in the diﬃculty of the tackled tasks.
The more diﬃcult the tasks (i.e., when regional terms have diﬃculty achieving
good performances), the larger the gain boundary loss brings (as it complements
regional information). GDL/ISLES is a noticeable case, where boundary loss
corrected substantially the performance of the GDL regional loss, making it the
winning competitor (although, without boundary information, it is the worse-
performing regional loss).
The mixed results with the UNet cross-entropy (improvement on ISLES,
but stall on WMH), and the diﬀerence on the HD95 metrics can potentially be
explained by a toxic interplay between the two losses: both of them are trying
to use the distance from the boundary information, potentially counter-acting
each others, and introducing instability.
Computing the distance map from the 3D volume rather than from the
2D slices gives a small boost in performance (about 1% DSC), and is more
noticeable on the training curve for WMH (Figure 3). This diﬀerence could be
explained by the spacing between the slices on the z axis: they are quite close
(and correlated) in the case of WMH. However, in the case of ISLES, the big
spacing (around 1cm) makes slices quite independent. Adding 3D information
in this case is less helpful.
6https://github.com/LIVIAETS/surface-loss
7https://github.com/JunMa11/SegWithDistMap
8We report the 95th percentile distance value instead of the maximum-distance value.
11

While the Hausdorﬀ loss [20] also improves the results over the GDL alone
(around 7% on ISLES), its performance is not always at the same level as bound-
ary loss (similar performance on WMH, but lower on ISLES). This is consistent
with the ﬁndings of [26], which found that the diﬀerences in performances are
dataset dependent.
Loss ISLES WMH
DSC HD95 (mm) DSC HD95 (mm)
LB NA NA NA NA
LHD NA NA 0.638 (NA) 4.578 (NA)
GDL 0.511 (0.016) 5.320 (1.742) 0.768 (0.051) 3.634 (2.570)
w/ LB (2D) 0.644 (0.026) 4.795 (3.712) 0.793 (0.006) 2.039 (1.834)
w/ LB (3D) 0.659 (0.001) 2.725 (2.196) 0.818 (0.003) 1.702 (1.982)
w/ LHD 0.582 (0.015) 4.126 (1.634) 0.805 (0.015) 2.151 (2.100)
UNet cross-entropy [10] 0.608 (0.025) 4.572 (0.675) 0.757 (0.015) 4.355 (3.388)
w/ LB (2D) 0.631 (0.016) 5.961 (2.291) 0.756 (0.022) 2.887 (2.629)
Focal loss [18] 0.631 (0.046) 4.989 (2.775) 0.808 (0.026) 1.816 (1.370)
w/ LB (2D) 0.650 (0.019) 1.770 (0.549) 0.786 (0.031) 2.258 (2.513)
Table 1: Average DSC and HD95 values (and standard deviation over three indepen-
dent runs) achieved on the validation subset. Best results highlighted in bold.
Using the boundary loss alone does not yield the same competitive results
as a joint loss (i.e., boundary and region), making the network collapse quickly
into empty foreground regions, i.e., softmax predictions close to zero 9. We be-
lieve that this is due to the following technical facts. In theory, the global
optimum of the boundary loss corresponds to a negative value, as a perfect
overlap sums only over the negative values of the distance map. In this case,
the softmax probabilities correspond to a non-empty foreground. However, an
empty foreground (null values of the softmax probabilities almost everywhere)
corresponds to low gradients. Therefore, this trivial solution is close a local
minimum or a saddle point. This is not the case when we use our boundary
loss in conjunction with a regional loss, which guides the training during the
ﬁrst epochs and avoids getting stuck in such a trivial solution. The scheduling
method then increases the weight of the boundary loss, with the latter becom-
ing very dominant towards the end of the training process. This behaviour of
boundary terms is conceptually similar to the behaviour of classical and popular
contour-based energies for level set segmentation, e.g., geodesic active contours
[23], which also require additional regional terms to avoid trivial solutions (i.e.,
empty foreground regions).
The learning curves depicted in Figure 3 show the gap in performances be-
tween using a regional loss LR alone and when augmented with our boundary
loss, for diﬀerent choices of LR. In most of the settings, the diﬀerence becomes
signiﬁcant at convergence. This behaviour is most visible when LR “ LGDL,
and is consistent for both metrics and both dataset, which clearly shows the
beneﬁts of employing the proposed boundary loss term.
9For this reason, we do not report metrics in this case, as it would be meaningless.
12

Figure 3: Evolution of DSC values on validation subsets, for diﬀerent base losses, on
both ISLES and WMH. Best viewed in colors.
13

Qualitative evaluation. Qualitative results are depicted in Fig. 4. Inspecting
these results visually, we can observe that there are two major types of improve-
ments when employing the proposed boundary loss. First, as the methods based
on DSC losses, such as GDL, do not use spatial information, prediction errors
are treated equally. This means that the errors for pixels/voxels in an already
detected object have the same importance as the errors produced in completely
missed objects. On the contrary, as our boundary loss is based on the distance
map from the ground-truth boundaryBG, it will penalize much more such cases,
helping to recover small and far regions. This eﬀect is best illustrated in Fig.
1 and Fig. 4 (third row). False positives (ﬁrst row in Fig. 4) will be far away
from the closest foreground, getting a much higher penalty than with the GDL
alone. This helps in reducing the number of false positives. Additional qual-
itative results for other base losses, and their combination with the proposed
boundary loss, are depicted in Figures 5, 6. These ﬁgures also show failure cases
(last column) of the boundary loss.
Figure 4: Visual comparison on two diﬀerent datasets from the validation set.
Computational complexity . It is worth mentioning that, as the proposed
boundary loss term involves an element-wise product between two matrices –
i.e., the pre-computed level-set function φG and the softmax output sθppq –
the complexity that it adds is negligible as showed in Table 2. Contrary, the
Hausdorﬀ loss [20] introduces around 10% of slowdown in the training process.
This will be further magniﬁed if we generalize to multi-class problems, where
14

Figure 5: Visual comparison on the WMH dataset for diﬀerent training losses. The last
column depicts a failure case, where the proposed loss does not enhance the regional
loss performance. Best viewed in colors. 15

Figure 6: Visual comparison on the ISLES dataset for diﬀerent training losses. The last
column depicts a failure case, where the proposed loss does not enhance the regional
loss performance. Best viewed in colors. 16

Loss Time (s) per batch
ISLES (Batch size = 4) WMH (Batch size = 8)
GDL 0.187 (0.129) 0.345 (0.132)
w/ LB 0.190 (0.128) 0.345 (0.129)
w/ LHD 0.210 (0.108) 0.392 (0.092)
Table 2: Training time required by diﬀerent losses. We report the average and standard
deviation batch time in seconds for each method.
an individual distance map should be computed for each class.
3.6.2. Selection of α
Table 3 reports the performances of the proposed approach on the ISLES seg-
mentation task for diﬀerentα values and scheduling techniques. Figure 3 shows
a subset of the learning curves related to α selection strategies in Table 3. This
is an indication that, while our boundary loss can beneﬁt from a tuned balance
between the two losses, even a sub-optimal α can already provide improvement
over the regional loss alone. Observe that increasing the weight of constant α
yields better performances, up to a certain value, with the performances de-
creasing starting from α “ 1.5. With α “ 2, the performance is similar to a
network trained with the boundary loss alone. In contrast, using any of the
two proposed scheduling strategies (increasing α or re-balancing) yields better
results than any constant α, without having to explore many conﬁgurations.
From the learning curves (Figure 7), we can notice that the GDL alone
and the GDL with a small constant α “ 0.001 have a similar training DSC
over time, but that their validation DSC are signiﬁcantly diﬀerent. A similar
behaviour can be observed by examining the results with constant α“ 1 and
the rebalanced α: while the rebalancing training DSC is slightly higher during
the whole training, the validation DSC becomes signiﬁcantly better around half
the training time, where the high constant α performances starts decreasing.
Strategy ISLES
DSC HD95
GDL only 0.511 (0.016) 5.320 (1.742)
Constantα
α“ 0.001 0.545 (0.020) 4.778 (1.546)
α“ 0.01 0.566 (0.019) 5.052 (1.395)
α“ 0.05 0.606 (0.015) 5.326 (1.712)
α“ 0.1 0.605 (0.010) 5.762 (1.782)
α“ 0.5 0.604 (0.006) 9.234 (10.463)
α“ 1 0.628 (0.023) 2.462 (0.706)
α“ 1.5 0.565 (0.074) 3.335 (1.164)
α“ 2 0.549 (0.084) 20.275 (16.603)
Increase α 0.622 (0.004) 4.952 (1.773)
Rebalance α 0.644 (0.026) 4.795 (3.712)
Table 3: Results on ISLES validation set for diﬀerent α.
17

Figure 7: Comparison of the training and validation DSC curves for diﬀerent α selec-
tion strategies. For readability, not all settings from Table 3 have been included. Best
viewed in colors.
The rebalancing strategy was used in all other experiments, and as showed
in Table 1, proved to be a good default strategy to integrate the boundary loss
with another regional loss.
4. Conclusion and future works
We proposed a boundary loss term that can be easily combined with any
standard regional loss, to tackle segmentation tasks in highly unbalanced scenar-
ios. Furthermore, the proposed term can be implemented with any existing deep
network architecture and for any N-D segmentation problem. Our experiments
on two challenging and highly unbalanced datasets demonstrated the beneﬁts
of including our boundary loss during training. It consistently improved the
performances, and by a large margin on one data set, with enhanced training
stability.
In this work, we evaluated the proposed boundary loss in the context of
class imbalance. However, there are other interesting avenues for extending
and evaluating our approach. For instance, our boundary loss has a spatial
regularization eﬀect because it is based on distance-to-boundary information.
In particular, we observed experimentally that it yield contours, which are,
typically, smoother than those obtained with regional losses. Focused on the
important problem of unbalanced segmentation, our experiments did not fully
investigate the beneﬁts of such a spatial regularization. An interesting future re-
search avenue will be to explore such a regularization eﬀect in applications with
challenging imaging noise, which may prevent regional losses from generating
smooth contours, e.g., ultrasound imaging. Another limitation of our formula-
tion and experiments is that they were limited to binary (two-region) segmen-
tation problems. It will be interesting to investigate extensions of boundary
loss to the multi-region scenario, with competing distance maps from multiple
structures and various/complex topological constraints (e.g., one structure fully
included within another).
18

Acknowledgments
This work is supported by the National Science and Engineering Research
Council of Canada (NSERC), Discovery Grants (DG) program, and by the ETS
Research Chair on Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Medical Imaging.
References
1. G. Litjens, T. Kooi, B. E. Bejnordi, A. A. A. Setio, F. Ciompi, M. Ghafoo-
rian, J. A. Van Der Laak, B. Van Ginneken, C. I. S´ anchez, A survey on
deep learning in medical image analysis, Medical image analysis 42 (2017)
60–88.
2. D. Shen, G. Wu, H.-I. Suk, Deep learning in medical image analysis, Annual
review of biomedical engineering 19 (2017) 221–248.
3. J. Dolz, C. Desrosiers, I. Ben Ayed, 3D fully convolutional networks for sub-
cortical segmentation in MRI: A large-scale study, NeuroImage 170 (2018)
456–470.
4. J. Ker, L. Wang, J. Rao, T. Lim, Deep learning applications in medical
image analysis, IEEE Access 6 (2018) 9375–9389.
5. F. Milletari, N. Navab, S.-A. Ahmadi, V-Net: Fully convolutional neural
networks for volumetric medical image segmentation, in: 3D Vision (3DV),
2016 Fourth International Conference on, IEEE, 2016, pp. 565–571.
6. C. H. Sudre, W. Li, T. Vercauteren, S. Ourselin, M. J. Cardoso, Gener-
alised dice overlap as a deep learning loss function for highly unbalanced
segmentations, in: Deep Learning in Medical Image Analysis and Multi-
modal Learning for Clinical Decision Support, Springer, 2017, pp. 240–248.
7. M. Havaei, A. Davy, D. Warde-Farley, A. Biard, A. Courville, Y. Bengio,
C. Pal, P.-M. Jodoin, H. Larochelle, Brain tumor segmentation with deep
neural networks, Medical image analysis 35 (2017) 18–31.
8. S. Valverde, M. Cabezas, E. Roura, S. Gonz´ alez-Vill` a, D. Pareto, J. C.
Vilanova, L. Ramio-Torrenta, `A. Rovira, A. Oliver, X. Llad´ o, Improving
automated multiple sclerosis lesion segmentation with a cascaded 3D con-
volutional neural network approach, NeuroImage 155 (2017) 159–168.
9. T. Brosch, Y. Yoo, L. Y. Tang, D. K. Li, A. Traboulsee, R. Tam, Deep
convolutional encoder networks for multiple sclerosis lesion segmentation,
in: International Conference on Medical Image Computing and Computer-
Assisted Intervention, Springer, 2015, pp. 3–11.
10. O. Ronneberger, P. Fischer, T. Brox, U-Net: Convolutional networks for
biomedical image segmentation, in: International Conference on Medical
image computing and computer-assisted intervention, Springer, 2015, pp.
234–241.
19

11. K. Kamnitsas, C. Ledig, V. F. Newcombe, J. P. Simpson, A. D. Kane,
D. K. Menon, D. Rueckert, B. Glocker, Eﬃcient multi-scale 3D CNN with
fully connected CRF for accurate brain lesion segmentation, Medical image
analysis 36 (2017) 61–78.
12. J. Long, E. Shelhamer, T. Darrell, Fully convolutional networks for semantic
segmentation, in: Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision
and pattern recognition, 2015, pp. 3431–3440.
13. L. Yu, X. Yang, H. Chen, J. Qin, P.-A. Heng, Volumetric convnets with
mixed residual connections for automated prostate segmentation from 3D
MR images., in: AAAI, 2017, pp. 66–72.
14. F. Milletari, S.-A. Ahmadi, C. Kroll, A. Plate, V. Rozanski, J. Maiostre,
J. Levin, O. Dietrich, B. Ertl-Wagner, K. B¨ otzel, et al., Hough-CNN: deep
learning for segmentation of deep brain regions in MRI and ultrasound,
Computer Vision and Image Understanding 164 (2017) 92–102.
15. K. C. Wong, M. Moradi, H. Tang, T. Syeda-Mahmood, 3D segmenta-
tion with exponential logarithmic loss for highly unbalanced object sizes,
in: International Conference on Medical Image Computing and Computer-
Assisted Intervention, Springer, 2018, pp. 612–619.
16. S. S. M. Salehi, D. Erdogmus, A. Gholipour, Tversky loss function for image
segmentation using 3D fully convolutional deep networks, in: International
Workshop on Machine Learning in Medical Imaging, Springer, 2017, pp.
379–387.
17. N. Abraham, N. M. Khan, A novel focal tversky loss function with improved
attention U-Net for lesion segmentation, arXiv preprint arXiv:1810.07842
(2018).
18. T.-Y. Lin, P. Goyal, R. Girshick, K. He, P. Doll´ ar, Focal loss for dense object
detection, IEEE transactions on pattern analysis and machine intelligence
(2018).
19. W. Zhu, Y. Huang, L. Zeng, X. Chen, Y. Liu, Z. Qian, N. Du, W. Fan,
X. Xie, Anatomynet: Deep learning for fast and fully automated whole-
volume segmentation of head and neck anatomy, Medical physics 46 (2)
(2019) 576–589.
20. D. Karimi, S. E. Salcudean, Reducing the hausdorﬀ distance in medical
image segmentation with convolutional neural networks, IEEE transactions
on medical imaging (2019).
21. Y. Boykov, V. Kolmogorov, D. Cremers, A. Delong, An integral solution to
surface evolution PDEs via geo-cuts, in: European Conference on Computer
Vision, Springer, 2006, pp. 409–422.
20

22. A. Mitiche, I. Ben Ayed, Variational and level set methods in image seg-
mentation, Springer, 2011.
23. V. Caselles, R. Kimmel, G. Sapiro, Geodesic active contours, International
Journal of Computer Vision 22 (1997) 61–79.
24. Y. Boykov, G. Funka-Lea, Graph cuts and eﬃcient n-d image segmentation,
International Journal of Computer Vision 70 (2006) 109–131.
25. A. Paszke, S. Gross, S. Chintala, G. Chanan, E. Yang, Z. DeVito, Z. Lin,
A. Desmaison, L. Antiga, A. Lerer, Automatic diﬀerentiation in pytorch
(2017).
26. J. Ma, Z. Wei, Y. Zhang, Y. Wang, R. Lv, C. Zhu, G. Chen, J. Liu, C. Peng,
L. Wang, et al., How distance transform maps boost segmentation cnns: An
empirical study, in: Medical Imaging with Deep Learning, 2020.
21