Pairwise Relation Learning for Semi-supervised
Gland Segmentation
Yutong Xie1⋆, Jianpeng Zhang 1∗, Zhibin Liao 2,3, Chunhua Shen2,
Johan Verjans2,3, Yong Xia 1,4
1 National Engineering Laboratory for Integrated Aero-Space-Ground-Ocean Big
Data Application Technology, School of Computer Science and Engineering,
Northwestern Polytechnical University, Xian 710072, China
yxia@nwpu.edu.cn
2 The University of Adelaide, Australia
3 South Australian Health and Medical Research Institute, Adelaide, Australia
4 Research & Development Institute of Northwestern Polytechnical University in
Shenzhen, Shenzhen 518057, China
Abstract. Accurate and automated gland segmentation on histology
tissue images is an essential but challenging task in the computer-aided
diagnosis of adenocarcinoma. Despite their prevalence, deep learning
models always require a myriad number of densely annotated training
images, which are diﬃcult to obtain due to extensive labor and associ-
ated expert costs related to histology image annotations. In this paper,
we propose the pairwise relation-based semi-supervised (PRS2) model for
gland segmentation on histology images. This model consists of a seg-
mentation network (S-Net) and a pairwise relation network (PR-Net).
The S-Net is trained on labeled data for segmentation, and PR-Net is
trained on both labeled and unlabeled data in an unsupervised way to
enhance its image representation ability via exploiting the semantic con-
sistency between each pair of images in the feature space. Since both
networks share their encoders, the image representation ability learned
by PR-Net can be transferred to S-Net to improve its segmentation per-
formance. We also design the object-level Dice loss to address the issues
caused by touching glands and combine it with other two loss functions
for S-Net. We evaluated our model against ﬁve recent methods on the
GlaS dataset and three recent methods on the CRAG dataset. Our re-
sults not only demonstrate the eﬀectiveness of the proposed PR-Net and
object-level Dice loss, but also indicate that our PRS2 model achieves the
state-of-the-art gland segmentation performance on both benchmarks.
Keywords: Gland Segmentation; Semi-supervised Learning; Pairwise
Relation Learning
⋆ Y. Xie and J. Zhang contributed equally to this work. The work was partially done
while the co-ﬁrst authors were visiting The University of Adelaide.
arXiv:2008.02699v1  [cs.CV]  6 Aug 2020

2 Authors Suppressed Due to Excessive Length
1 Introduction
Quantitative measurement of glands on histology tissue images is an eﬀective
means to assist pathologists in diagnosing the malignancy of adenocarcinoma [6].
Manual annotation of glands requires specialized knowledge and intense con-
centration, and is often time-consuming. Automated gland segmentation avoids
many of these issues and provides pathologists an unprecedented ability to re-
liably characterise and quantify glands. Although being increasingly studied to
improve its accuracy, eﬃciency and objectivity [7,16,19], this task remains chal-
lenging mainly due to (1) inadequate training data with pixel-wise dense anno-
tations and (2) small gaps and adhesive edges between adjacent glands.
Currently, most available gland segmentation methods are based on deep con-
volutional neural networks (DCNNs) [2,7,13,16,18,19]. Chen etal. [2] presented
a deep contour-aware network that harnesses multi-scale features to separate
glands from the background and also employs the complementary information
of contours to delineate each gland. Qu et al. [13] proposed a full resolution
convolutional neural network to improve the gland localization and introduced a
variance constrained cross-entropy loss to advance the shape similarity of glands.
Yan et al. [19] developed a shape-aware adversarial learning model for simul-
taneous gland segmentation and contour detection. Although superior to the
performance of previous solutions, the performance of these DCNN-based gland
segmentation methods depends heavily on a substantial number of training im-
ages with pixel-wise labels, which are diﬃcult to obtain due to the tremendous
eﬀorts and costs tied to the dense annotations of histology images.
To alleviate the burden of data annotation, semi-supervised segmentation
models have been developed to jointly use labeled and unlabeled data for co-
training [17]. Recent semi-supervised learning (SSL) methods are usually based
on consistency regularization [12]. Speciﬁcally, unlabeled data are exploited ac-
cording to the smoothness assumption that certain perturbations of an input
should not signiﬁcantly vary the prediction [4, 9, 10, 12, 20]. Nevertheless, these
methods only measure the consistency between diﬀerent perturbations of an in-
put image. In fact, diﬀerent images may contain the same kind of foreground
objects (e.g., glands). The objects on two images may share consistent represen-
tations in the feature space as long as they have the same semantic label. We
advocate that such pairwise consistency should be explored to establish an un-
supervised way to learn generalized feature representation from unlabeled data.
In this paper, we propose the pairwise relation-based semi-supervised (PRS2)
model for gland segmentation on histology tissue images. This model is composed
of a supervised segmentation network (S-Net) and an unsupervised pairwise re-
lation network (PR-Net). The PR-Net is trained to boost its ability to learn
both semantic consistency and image representation via exploiting the semantic
consistency between each pair of images in the feature space. Since the encoders
of S-Net and PR-Net share parameters, the ability learned by PR-Net can be
transferred to S-Net to improve its segmentation performance. Meanwhile, we
employ the object-level Dice loss to impose additional constraints on each in-
dividual gland, and thus addresses the issues caused by touching glands. The

Pairwise Relation Learning for Semi-supervised Gland Segmentation 3
Fig. 1. Diagram of the proposed PRS 2 model.
object-level Dice was originally proposed in [14] as a performance metric, but
not as a loss function. We transform it as a loss and combine this loss with the
pixel-level cross-entropy loss and global-level Dice loss to form a multi-level loss
for S-Net. We evaluate the proposed PRS2 model on the GlaS Challenge dataset
and CRAG dataset and achieve superior performance over several recently pub-
lished gland segmentation models.
The contributions include: (1) proposing the pairwise relation interaction to
exploit the semantic consistency between each pair of images in the feature space,
enabling the model to learn semantic consistency and image representation in
an unsupervised way; (2) transforming the object-level Dice evaluation metric
as a loss and employing it to address the issues caused by touching glands;
and (3) constructing the PRS 2 model that achieves the state-of-the-art gland
segmentation performance on two benchmarks.
2 Method
The proposed PRS 2 model has two major modules: the S-Net for supervised
gland segmentation and PR-Net for unsupervised semantic relation learning (see
Fig. 1). Let the labeled training set with M images be denoted by X L, the
unlabeled training set withN images be denoted byX U, and the whole training
image set be denoted by X = X L∪X U. The pipeline of this model can be
summarized in two steps. First, the S-Net is trained on X L for an initialization.
Since the encoders of both networks share the same architecture and parameters,
the encoders PR-Net is also initialized in this step. Then, both the S-Net and
the PR-Net are jointly ﬁne-tuned on X with the parameter-sharing mechanism.
S-Net. We use the DeepLabv3+ model [3] pretrained on PASCAL VOC 2012
dataset [5] as S-Net. To adapt DeepLabv3+ to our task, we replace the last con-
volutional layer, which is task speciﬁc, with a convolutional layer that contains

4 Authors Suppressed Due to Excessive Length
two output neurons to predict glands and background. The weights in this layer
are randomly initialized, and the activation is set to the softmax function.
We design the following multi-level segmentation lossLseg for S-Net, deﬁned
as follows
Lseg =Lce +LDice +LobjDice, (1)
whereLce is the cross-entropy loss that optimizes pixel-level accuracy, LDice
is the Dice loss that optimizes the overlap between the prediction and ground
truth, andLobjDice is the object-level Dice loss. Combining the ﬁrst two losses is
commonly used in many medical image segmentation applications and achieves
remarkable success [15, 21]. However, gland segmentation requires not only to
segment the glands from background, but also to separate each individual gland
from others. The latter requirement is quite challenging due to the existence of
touching glands. To address this challenge, we propose the object-level Dice loss
as follows
LobjDice = 1
2


n∑
i=1
|Si|∑n
k=1|Sk|LDice(Gi,Si) +
m∑
j=1
| ˜Gj|∑m
k=1| ˜Gk|
LDice( ˜Gj, ˜Sj)

,
(2)
whereSi is the ith segmented gland, Gi is the ground truth gland that maxi-
mally overlaps Si, ˜Gj is the jth ground truth gland, and ˜Sj is the segmented
gland that maximally overlaps ˜Gj. The m and n denote the total number of
ground truth glands and segmented glands for an input image, respectively. In
this deﬁnition, the ﬁrst term measures how well each segmented gland overlaps
its corresponding ground truth, whereas the second term measures how well
each ground truth gland overlaps its corresponding segmented gland. This loss
function considers the instance-level discrepancy between a segmentation result
and its ground truth, and thus is able to help S-Net learn more discriminatory
feature representations for gland segmentation.
PR-Net. The PR-Net exploits the semantic consistency between each pair of
images for unsupervised pairwise relation learning. It is a composition of three
modules: (1) an image pair input layer, (2) an encoderF(·) for feature extraction,
and (3) a pairwise relation module (PRM). The input layer accepts a pair of
images (xA,xB), which are randomly sampled from the whole training set X,
as input. The encoder shares the identical architecture and parameters with the
encoder of S-Net (i.e., modiﬁed aligned Xception), whose output can be formally
presented as follows
fA =F(xA;Θ)∈ RC×H×W,fB =F(xB;Θ)∈ RC×H×W, (3)
where Θ denotes the parameters of the encoder, and C,H and W denote re-
spectively the number of channels, height, and width of the encoded feature
representation.
The PRM is proposed to highlight the targets of the same semantic class but
located on two images. To this end, we ﬁrst calculate the consistency relation

Pairwise Relation Learning for Semi-supervised Gland Segmentation 5
matrix C fromfB tofA as follows
CB→A = softmax(R(fA)T·R(fB))T∈ R(H×W )×(H×W ), (4)
where R(·) represents a reshape function which collapses the H and W dimen-
sions into a single dimension with H×W elements, and the softmax function
normalizes the elements in the second dimension. The C(B→A)i,j measures the
consistencyith ﬂattened ‘pixel’ (in the feature representation space) offB tojth
‘pixel’ of fA, where a larger C(B→A)i,j indicates a higher semantic consistency
between these two ‘pixels’.
Next, we perform a matrix multiplication between R(fB) and CB→A to ob-
tain the attention map M offA, formulated as
MA =R−1(
R(fB)· CB→A
)
∈ RC×H×W, (5)
where R−1 is a reverse operation of R, each element in MA can be considered
as a weighted sum offB over all positions, where the weights are determined by
CB→A. Finally, we add MA to the feature map fA via an element-wise summa-
tion to obtain the target-highlighted feature maps ˜fA, show as follows
˜fA = MA +fA, (6)
Similarly, the ˜fB can be calculated as
˜fB = MB +fB, (7)
Both target-highlighted feature maps ˜fA and ˜fB have the merit of consis-
tency relation information betweenfA andfB, and thus can serve as the targets
of PR-Net to enforce the model to increase the semantic consistency for any pair
of image feature maps. Hence, the loss function of PR-Net can be expressed as
LP R =LSL1
(
σ( ˜fA),σ (fA)
)
  
LSL1(B→A)
+LSL1
(
σ( ˜fB),σ (fB)
)
  
LSL1(A→B)
, (8)
whereLSL1 is the smoothL1 loss, andσ(·) is the sigmoid function. Both ˜fA and
˜fB, served as the target signals, do not perform back-propagation in each itera-
tion. We also randomly select a pair of images and visualize their corresponding
channel-wise sum of σ(f) as well as σ( ˜f) in Fig. 2 to show the superiority of ˜f.
Optimization of PRS 2 model. The total loss of the proposed PRS 2 model is
deﬁned as the weighted sum of multi-level segmentation loss Lseg and unsuper-
vised semantic consistency lossLP R such that
Ltotal =Lseg +αLP R, (9)
whereα is a weighting factor that controls the contribution of unsupervised loss.
We adopt the Adam algorithm [11] with a batch size of 5 and 10 to train S-Net
and PR-Net, respectively, and also set 20% of the training set as a validation set
to monitor the performance of both networks. The initial learning rate is set to
1e-4 in the initialization step and 5e-5 in the ﬁne-tuning step.

6 Authors Suppressed Due to Excessive Length
Fig. 2. A pair of images and the corresponding channel-wise sum of σ(f) and σ( ˜f)
3 Experiments and Results
Materials. We adopted the 2015 MICCAI Gland Segmentation (GlaS) chal-
lenge dataset [14] and colorectal adenocarcinoma gland (CRAG) dataset [1, 7]
to evaluate the proposed PRS 2 model. The GlaS dataset contains 85 training
and 80 test images (60 in Part A; 20 in Part B). The CRAG dataset has 173
training and 40 test images. When evaluating PRS 2 on the GlaS test set, the
CRAG training set was considered as unlabeled training data, and vice versa.
Evaluation Metrics. On the GlaS dataset, three metrics oﬃcially suggested by
the GlaS Challenge [14] were calculated to assess the segmentation performance,
including the object-level Dice (Obj-D) that represents the accuracy of delin-
eating each individual gland, the object-level F1 score (Obj-F) that evaluates
the accuracy of detecting each gland, and the object-level Hausdorﬀ distance
(Obj-H) that measures the shape similarity between each segmented gland and
its ground truth. Meanwhile, all competing segmentation models were ranked
according to each of these three metrics, and the sum of three ranking scores is
calculated to measure the overall performance of each model. Note that a lower
ranking score indicates better segmentation performance.
Implementation Details. In the training stage, we followed the suggestion
in [16] to randomly crop patches from each training image as the input of both
S-Net and PR-Net. The patch size was set to 416× 416 on the GlaS dataset and
512× 512 on the CRAG dataset. When training PRS 2 model, we resized CRAG
patches to 416× 416 if the labelled samples are from GlaS dataset, or resized
GlaS patches to 512 × 512 if the labelled samples are from CRAG dataset. To
further enlarge the training dataset, we employed the online data augmentation,
which includes random rotation, shear, shift, zooming, and horizontal/vertical
ﬂip, and color normalization. In the test stage, test time augmentations including
cropping, horizontal/vertical ﬂip and rotation, were also utilized to improve the
robustness of segmentation. As a result, each segmentation result is the average
of the results obtained on the original image and its three types of augmented
copies. Moreover, the morphological opening using a square structure element
with a size of 10× 10 was ﬁnally performed to smooth segmentation results.
Results on Two Datasets. On the GlaS dataset, we compared the proposed
PRS2 model to ﬁve recently published gland segmentation models, including

Pairwise Relation Learning for Semi-supervised Gland Segmentation 7
T able 1. Gland segmentation performance of the proposed PRS 2 model and recently
published models on both GlaS and CRAG datasets. M and R denote metric value
and ranking score, respectively. Note that the performance on the GlaS dataset is the
average performance on test data part A and part B
Datasets Methods Obj-D Obj-F Obj-H Rank sumM (%) R M (%) R M R
GlaS dataset
DCAN 83.9 8 81.4 8 102.9 8 24
MILD-Net 87.5 6 87.9 5 73.7 6 17
SADL 87.3 7 88.9 3 76.7 7 17
Rota-Net 88.4 5 87.2 6 68.4 5 16
FullNet 88.5 4 88.9 3 63.0 4 11
DSE 89.9 2 89.4 1 55.9 2 5
SS 89.6 3 86.9 7 62.8 3 13
Our PRS 2 90.6 1 89.0 2 55.1 1 4
CRAG dataset
DCAN 79.4 5 73.6 5 218.8 5 15
MILD-Net 87.5 4 82.5 3 160.1 4 11
DSE 88.9 2 83.5 2 120.1 2 6
SS 87.6 3 81.6 4 145.0 3 10
Our PRS 2 89.2 1 84.3 1 113.1 1 3
the deep contour-aware network (DCAN) [2], the minimal information loss di-
lated network (MILD-Net) [7], the shape-aware adversarial learning (SADL)
model [19], the rotation equivariant network (Rota-Net) [8], the full resolu-
tion convolutional neural network (FullNet) [13], and the deep segmentation-
emendation (DSE) model [16]. On the CRAG dataset, we compared our model
to three models, i.e., DCAN, MILD-Net, and DSE. The performance of these
models was given in Table 1. Note that the performance of all competing models
was adopted in the literature, and the performance on the GlaS dataset is the
average performance on test data part A and part B. Finally, we also compared
our model to a typical semi-supervised (SS) method on both datasets, i.e., us-
ing a trained S-Net to generate segmentation predictions of unlabelled data and
using a CRF-like approach to generate the proxy labels for ﬁne-tuning the S-Net.
It shows that our model achieves the highest Obj-D, second highest Obj-
F, and lowest Obj-H on the GlaS dataset. Comparing to the DSE model that
performs the second best, our model improves the Obj-D by 0.7% and the Obj-H
by 0.8. On the CRAG dataset, it reveals that our model achieves the highest Obj-
D, highest Obj-F, and lowest Obj-H, improving the Obj-D, Obj-F and Obj-H
from 88.9%, 83.5% and 120.1, which were achieved by the second best model, to
89.2%, 84.3% and 113.1, respectively. The results on both datasets indicate that
the proposed PRS 2 model is able to produce more accurate for segmentation of
glands and its performance is relatively robust.
4 Discusses
Trade-oﬀ between labeled and unlabeled data. A major advantage of our
PRS2 model is to use the unlabeled images to facilitate model training, leading

8 Authors Suppressed Due to Excessive Length
Fig. 3. Obj-D and Obj-F values achieved on two datasets by our semi-supervised PRS2
model and fully-supervised S-Net, when 20%, 50% and 100% labeled training images
to (1) less requirement of densely annotated training data or (2) improved seg-
mentation performance when the labeled training dataset is small. To validate
this, we kept the test set and unlabeled training set unchanged and randomly
selected 20% and 50% labeled training images, respectively, to perform the seg-
mentation experiments on both datasets again. As a control, we also used those
selected labeled training images to train S-Net in a fully-supervised manner. The
segmentation performance of our PRS 2 model and S-Net was shown in Fig. 3,
from which three conclusions can be drawn. First, the segmentation performance
of both models improves as the number of labeled training images increases. Sec-
ond, using both labeled the unlabeled images, our model outperforms the fully-
supervised S-Net steadily no matter how many labeled training images were
used. More important, it is interesting that our model trained with 50% labeled
images can achieve a comparable performance with the fully-supervised S-Net
trained with 100% training data on both datasets. Similarly, it reveals that our
model trained with 20% labeled images can achieve a comparable performance
with the S-Net trained with 50% training data. It suggests that our model pro-
vides the possibility of using unlabeled data to replace almost half of labeled
training images while maintaining the segmentation performance.
Multi-level segmentation loss.To demonstrate the performance gain resulted
from the proposed multi-level segmentation loss, we also attempted to train the
S-Net with diﬀerent loss functions, including LDice,Lce andLDice +Lce. The
results in Table 2 reveals that (1) using the combination of Dice and cross-
entropy loss can produce higher Obj-F than using the Dice loss or cross-entropy
loss alone, and (2) the superior performance of our multi-level loss over the
combination of Dice and cross-entropy loss conﬁrms the eﬀectiveness of using
the object-level Dice loss to pose constraints to each individual gland.
Complexity. Two parameter-sharing DCNNs in our PRS 2 model are trained
using the open source Pytorch software packages. In our experiments, it took
about 12 hours to train our PRS 2 model (2 hours for the initialization step and

Pairwise Relation Learning for Semi-supervised Gland Segmentation 9
T able 2. Gland segmentation performance of S-Net obtained on two datasets when
using diﬀerent loss functions
Loss functions GlaS dataset CRAG dataset
Obj-D Obj-F Obj-H Obj-D Obj-F Obj-H
LDice 86.5 86.2 75.3 84.7 78.9 174.9
Lce 88.4 86.1 65.5 86.7 77.8 139.5
Lce + LDice 88.7 86.0 66.5 86.3 80.3 157.3
Lce + LDice + LobjDice(Ours) 89.4 86.5 64.1 87.1 82.1 138.6
10 hours for the ﬁne-tuning step) and less than 1 second to segment each test
image on a server with 4 NVIDIA GTX 2080 Ti GPUs and 128GB Memory.
5 Conclusion
In this paper, we propose the PRS 2 model for gland segmentation on histology
tissue images, which consists of a supervised segmentation network with a newly
designed loss and an unsupervised PR-Net that boosts its image representation
ability via exploiting the semantic consistency between each pair of images in
the feature space. Our results indicate that this model outperforms ﬁve recent
methods on the GlaS dataset and three recent methods on the CRAG dataset.
Our ablation study suggests the eﬀectiveness of proposed loss and PR-Net. Al-
though our model is built upon the speciﬁc application of gland segmentation,
the pairwise relation-based semi-supervised strategy itself is generic and can po-
tentially be applied to other deep model-based medical image segmentation tasks
to reduce the requirement of densely annotated training images.
Acknowledgment
Y Xie, J Zhang, and Y Xia were supported in part by the National Natural
Science Foundation of China under Grants 61771397, in part by the Science
and Technology Innovation Committee of Shenzhen Municipality, China, un-
der Grants JCYJ20180306171334997, and in part by Innovation Foundation
for Doctor Dissertation of Northwestern Polytechnical University under Grants
CX202010.
References
1. Awan, R., Sirinukunwattana, K., Epstein, D., Jeﬀeryes, S., Qidwai, U., Aftab,
Z., Mujeeb, I., Snead, D., Rajpoot, N.: Glandular morphometrics for objective
grading of colorectal adenocarcinoma histology images. Scientiﬁc Reports 7(1),
16852 (2017)
2. Chen, H., Qi, X., Yu, L., Heng, P.A.: Dcan: deep contour-aware networks for accu-
rate gland segmentation. In: IEEE International Conference on Computer Vision
(ICCV). pp. 2487–2496 (2016)
3. Chen, L.C., Zhu, Y., Papandreou, G., Schroﬀ, F., Adam, H.: Encoder-decoder
with atrous separable convolution for semantic image segmentation. In: European
Conference on Computer Vision (ECCV) (2018)

10 Authors Suppressed Due to Excessive Length
4. Cui, W., Liu, Y., Li, Y., Guo, M., Li, Y., Li, X., Wang, T., Zeng, X., Ye, C.: Semi-
supervised brain lesion segmentation with an adapted mean teacher model. In:
International Conference on Information Processing in Medical Imaging (IPMI).
pp. 554–565. Springer (2019)
5. Everingham, M., Van Gool, L., Williams, C.K., Winn, J., Zisserman, A.: The pascal
visual object classes (voc) challenge. International Journal of Computer Vision
88(2), 303–338 (2010)
6. Gazdar, A., Maitra, A.: Adenocarcinomas. In: Brenner, S., Miller, J.H.
(eds.) Encyclopedia of Genetics, pp. 9 – 12. Academic Press, New
York (2001). https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1006/rwgn.2001.1540, http://
www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/B0122270800015408
7. Graham, S., Chen, H., Gamper, J., Dou, Q., Heng, P.A., Snead, D., Tsang, Y.W.,
Rajpoot, N.: Mild-net: Minimal information loss dilated network for gland instance
segmentation in colon histology images. Medical Image Analysis52, 199–211 (2019)
8. Graham, S., Epstein, D., Rajpoot, N.: Rota-net: Rotation equivariant network
for simultaneous gland and lumen segmentation in colon histology images. In:
European Congress on Digital Pathology. pp. 109–116. Springer (2019)
9. Jeong, J., Lee, S., Kim, J., Kwak, N.: Consistency-based semi-supervised learn-
ing for object detection. In: Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems
(NeurIPS). pp. 10758–10767 (2019)
10. Ke, Z., Wang, D., Yan, Q., Ren, J., Lau, R.W.: Dual student: Breaking the limits
of the teacher in semi-supervised learning. In: IEEE International Conference on
Computer Vision (ICCV). pp. 6728–6736 (2019)
11. Kingma, D.P., Ba, J.: Adam: A method for stochastic optimization. In: Interna-
tional Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR) (2015)
12. Oliver, A., Odena, A., Raﬀel, C.A., Cubuk, E.D., Goodfellow, I.: Realistic evalua-
tion of deep semi-supervised learning algorithms. In: Advances in Neural Informa-
tion Processing Systems (NeurIPS). pp. 3235–3246 (2018)
13. Qu, H., Yan, Z., Riedlinger, G.M., De, S., Metaxas, D.N.: Improving nuclei/gland
instance segmentation in histopathology images by full resolution neural net-
work and spatial constrained loss. In: International Conference on Medical Image
Computing and Computer-Assisted Intervention (MICCAI). pp. 378–386. Springer
(2019)
14. Sirinukunwattana, K., Pluim, J.P., Chen, H., Qi, X., Heng, P.A., Guo, Y.B., Wang,
L.Y., Matuszewski, B.J., Bruni, E., Sanchez, U., et al.: Gland segmentation in colon
histology images: The glas challenge contest. Medical Image Analysis 35, 489–502
(2017)
15. Wong, K.C., Moradi, M., Tang, H., Syeda-Mahmood, T.: 3d segmentation with ex-
ponential logarithmic loss for highly unbalanced object sizes. In: International Con-
ference on Medical Image Computing and Computer-Assisted Intervention (MIC-
CAI). pp. 612–619. Springer (2018)
16. Xie, Y., Lu, H., Zhang, J., Shen, C., Xia, Y.: Deep segmentation-emendation model
for gland instance segmentation. In: International Conference on Medical Image
Computing and Computer-Assisted Intervention (MICCAI). pp. 469–477 (2019)
17. Xie, Y., Zhang, J., Xia, Y.: Semi-supervised adversarial model for benign–
malignant lung nodule classiﬁcation on chest ct. Medical Image Analysis 57, 237–
248 (2019)
18. Xu, Y., Li, Y., Wang, Y., Liu, M., Fan, Y., Lai, M., Eric, I., Chang, C.: Gland in-
stance segmentation using deep multichannel neural networks. IEEE Transactions
on Biomedical Engineering 64(12), 2901–2912 (2017)

Pairwise Relation Learning for Semi-supervised Gland Segmentation 11
19. Yan, Z., Yang, X., Cheng, K.: Enabling a single deep learning model
for accurate gland instance segmentation: A shape-aware adversarial learn-
ing framework. IEEE Transactions on Medical Imaging pp. 1–1 (2020).
https://doi.org/10.1109/TMI.2020.2966594
20. Zhai, X., Oliver, A., Kolesnikov, A., Beyer, L.: S4l: Self-supervised semi-supervised
learning. In: IEEE International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV). pp.
1476–1485 (2019)
21. Zhang, J., Xie, Y., Zhang, P., Chen, H., Xia, Y., Shen, C.: Light-weight hybrid
convolutional network for liver tumour segmentation. In: International Joint Con-
ference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (IJCAI). pp. 10–16 (2019)