A survey of loss functions for semantic
segmentation
Shruti Jadon
IEEE Member
shrutijadon@ieee.org
Abstract—Image Segmentation has been an active ﬁeld of
research as it has a wide range of applications, ranging from
automated disease detection to self driving cars. In the past
5 years, various papers came up with different objective loss
functions used in different cases such as biased data, sparse
segmentation, etc. In this paper, we have summarized some of the
well-known loss functions widely used for Image Segmentation
and listed out the cases where their usage can help in fast
and better convergence of a model. Furthermore, we have also
introduced a new log-cosh dice loss function and compared its
performance on NBFS skull-segmentation open source data-set
with widely used loss functions. We also showcased that certain
loss functions perform well across all data-sets and can be taken
as a good baseline choice in unknown data distribution scenarios.
Index Terms—Computer Vision, Image Segmentation, Medical
Image, Loss Function, Optimization, Healthcare, Skull Stripping,
Deep Learning
I. I NTRODUCTION
Deep learning has revolutionized various industries ranging
from software to manufacturing. Medical community has
also beneﬁted from deep learning. There have been multiple
innovations in disease classiﬁcation, example, tumor segmen-
tation using U-Net and cancer detection using SegNet. Image
segmentation is one of the crucial contribution of deep learning
community to medical ﬁelds. Apart from telling that some
disease exists it also showcases where exactly it exists. It
has drastically helped in creating algorithms to detect tumors,
lesions etc. in various types of medical scans.
Image Segmentation can be deﬁned as classiﬁcation task
on pixel level. An image consists of various pixels, and these
pixels grouped together deﬁne different elements in image. A
method of classifying these pixels into the a elements is called
semantic image segmentation. The choice of loss/objective
function is extremely important while designing complex
image segmentation based deep learning architectures as they
instigate the learning process of algorithm. Therefore, since
2012, researchers have experimented with various domain
speciﬁc loss function to improve results for their datasets.
In this paper we have summarized ﬁfteen such segmentation
based loss functions that have been proven to provide state
of art results in different domains. These loss function can
be categorized into 4 categories: Distribution-based, Region-
based, Boundary-based, and Compounded (Refer I). We have
also discussed the conditions to determine which objective/loss
function might be useful in a scenario. Apart from this, we
have proposed a new log-cosh dice loss function for semantic
segmentation. To showcase its efﬁciency, we compared the
performance of all loss functions on NBFS Skull-stripping
dataset [1] and shared the outcomes in form of Dice Co-
efﬁcient, Sensitivity, and Speciﬁcity. The code implementa-
tion is available at GitHub: https://github.com/shruti-jadon/
Semantic-Segmentation-Loss-Functions.
Fig. 1. Sample Brain Lesion Segmentation CT Scan [2]. In this segmentation
mask you can see, that number of pixels of white area(targeted lesion) is less
than number of black pixels.
TABLE I
TYPES OF SEMANTIC SEGMENTATION LOSS FUNCTIONS [3]
Type Loss Function
Distribution-based Loss Binary Cross-Entropy
Weighted Cross-Entropy
Balanced Cross-Entropy
Focal Loss
Distance map derived loss penalty term
Region-based Loss Dice Loss
Sensitivity-Speciﬁcity Loss
Tversky Loss
Focal Tversky Loss
Log-Cosh Dice Loss (ours)
Boundary-based Loss Hausdorff Distance loss
Shape aware loss
Compounded Loss Combo Loss
Exponential Logarithmic Loss
II. L OSS FUNCTIONS
Deep Learning algorithms use stochastic gradient descent
approach to optimize and learn the objective. To learn an
objective accurately and faster, we need to ensure that our
mathematical representation of objectives, also known as loss
978-1-7281-9468-4/20/$31.00 ©2020 IEEE
arXiv:2006.14822v4  [eess.IV]  3 Sep 2020

functions are able to cover even the edge cases. The intro-
duction of loss functions have roots in traditional machine
learning, where these loss functions were derived on basis
of distribution of labels. For example, Binary Cross Entropy
is derived from Bernoulli distribution and Categorical Cross-
Entropy from Multinoulli distribution. In this paper, we have
focused on Semantic Segmentation instead of Instance Seg-
mentation, therefore the number of classes at pixel level is
restricted to 2. Here, we will go over 15 widely used loss
functions and understand their use-case scenarios.
Fig. 2. Graph of Binary Cross Entropy Loss Function. Here, Entropy is
deﬁned on Y-axis and Probability of event is on X-axis.
A. Binary Cross-Entropy
Cross-entropy [4] is deﬁned as a measure of the difference
between two probability distributions for a given random
variable or set of events. It is widely used for classiﬁcation
objective, and as segmentation is pixel level classiﬁcation it
works well.
Binary Cross-Entropy is deﬁned as:
LBCE (y, ˆy) =−(ylog(ˆy) + (1−y)log(1− ˆy)) (1)
Here, ˆy is the predicted value by the prediction model.
B. Weighted Binary Cross-Entropy
Weighted Binary cross entropy (WCE) [5] is a variant of
binary cross entropy variant. In this the positive examples get
weighted by some coefﬁcient. It is widely used in case of
skewed data [6] as shown in ﬁgure 1. Weighted Cross Entropy
can be deﬁned as:
LW−BCE (y, ˆy) =−(β∗ylog(ˆy) + (1−y)log(1− ˆy)) (2)
Note: β value can be used to tune false negatives and false
positives. E.g; If you want to reduce the number of false
negatives then set β > 1, similarly to decrease the number
of false positives, set β <1.
C. Balanced Cross-Entropy
Balanced cross entropy (BCE) [7] is similar to Weighted
Cross Entropy. The only difference is that in this apart from
just positive examples [8], we also weight also the negative
examples. Balanced Cross-Entropy can be deﬁned as follows:
LBCE (y, ˆy) =−(β∗ylog(ˆy)+(1−β)∗(1−y)log(1− ˆy)) (3)
Here, β is deﬁned as 1− y
H∗W
D. Focal Loss
Focal loss (FL) [9] can also be seen as variation of Binary
Cross-Entropy. It down-weights the contribution of easy
examples and enables the model to focus more on learning
hard examples. It works well for highly imbalanced class
scenarios, as shown in ﬁg 1. Lets look at how this focal loss
is designed. We will ﬁrst look at binary cross entropy loss
and learn how Focal loss is derived from cross-entropy.
CE =
{
−log(p), if y = 1
−log(1−p), otherwise (4)
To make convenient notation, Focal Loss deﬁnes the estimated
probability of class as:
pt =
{
p, if y = 1
1−p, otherwise (5)
Therefore, Now Cross-Entropy can be written as,
CE (p,y ) = CE (pt) =−log(pt) (6)
Focal Loss proposes to down-weight easy examples and focus
training on hard negatives using a modulating factor, ((1−
p)t)γ as shown below:
FL (pt) =−αt(1−pt)γlog(pt) (7)
Here, γ > 0 and when γ = 1 Focal Loss works like Cross-
Entropy loss function. Similarly,α generally range from [0,1],
It can be set by inverse class frequency or treated as a hyper-
parameter.
E. Dice Loss
The Dice coefﬁcient is widely used metric in computer
vision community to calculate the similarity between two
images. Later in 2016, it has also been adapted as loss function
known as Dice Loss [10].
DL(y, ˆp) = 1− 2y ˆp + 1
y + ˆp + 1 (8)
Here, 1 is added in numerator and denominator to ensure that
the function is not undeﬁned in edge case scenarios such as
when y = ˆp = 0.
F . Tversky Loss
Tversky index (TI) [11] can also be seen as an generalization
of Dices coefﬁcient. It adds a weight to FP (false positives)
and FN (false negatives) with the help of β coefﬁcient.
TI (p, ˆp) = pˆp
pˆp +β(1−p)ˆp + (1−β)p(1− ˆp) (9)

Here, when β = 1 /2, It can be solved into regular Dice
coefﬁcient. Similar to Dice Loss, Tversky loss can also be
deﬁned as:
TL (p, ˆp) = 1− 1 +pˆp
1 +pˆp +β(1−p)ˆp + (1−β)p(1− ˆp) (10)
G. Focal Tversky Loss
Similar to Focal Loss, which focuses on hard example
by down-weighting easy/common ones. Focal Tversky loss
[12] also attempts to learn hard-examples such as with small
ROIs(region of interest) with the help ofγ coefﬁcient as shown
below:
FTL =
∑
c
(1−TIc)γ (11)
here, TI indicates tversky index, and γ can range from [1,3].
H. Sensitivity Speciﬁcity Loss
Similar to Dice Coefﬁcient, Sensitivity and Speciﬁcity are
widely used metrics to evaluate the segmentation predictions.
In this loss function, we can tackle class imbalance problem
using w parameter. The loss [13] is deﬁned as:
SSL =w∗sensitivity + (1−w)∗specificity (12)
where,
sensitivity = TP
TP +FN (13)
and
specificity = TN
TN +FP (14)
I. Shape-aware Loss
Shape-aware loss [14] as the name suggests takes shape into
account. Generally, all loss functions work at pixel level, how-
ever, Shape-aware loss calculates the average point to curve
Euclidean distance among points around curve of predicted
segmentation to the ground truth and use it as coefﬁcient to
cross-entropy loss function. It is deﬁned as follows:
Ei =D( ˆC,CGT ) (15)
Lshape−aware =−
∑
i
CE (y, ˆy)−
∑
iEiCE (y, ˆy) (16)
Using Ei the network learns to produce a prediction masks
similar to the training shapes.
J. Combo Loss
Combo loss [15] is deﬁned as a weighted sum of Dice
loss and a modiﬁed cross entropy. It attempts to leverage the
ﬂexibility of Dice loss of class imbalance and at same time
use cross-entropy for curve smoothing. It’s deﬁned as:
Lm−bce =− 1
N
∑
i
β(y−log(ˆy)) + (1−β)(1−y)log(1− ˆy)
(17)
CL(y, ˆy) = αLm−bce− (1−α)DL(y, ˆy) (18)
Here DL is Dice Loss.
K. Exponential Logarithmic Loss
Exponential Logarithmic loss [16] function focuses on less
accurately predicted structures using combined formulation of
Dice Loss and Cross Entropy loss. Wong et al. [16] proposes
to make exponential and logarithmic transforms to both Dice
loss an cross entropy loss so as to incorporate beneﬁts of ﬁner
decision boundaries and accurate data distribution. It is deﬁned
as:
LExp =wDiceLDice +wcrossLcross (19)
where
LDice =E(−ln(DC )γDice ) (20)
Lcross =E(wl(−ln(pl))γcross )) (21)
Wong et al. [16] have used γcross =γDice for simplicity.
L. Distance map derived loss penalty term
Distance Maps can be deﬁned as distance (euclidean, ab-
solute, etc.) between the ground truth and the predicted map.
There are two ways to incorporate distance maps, either create
neural network architecture where there’s a reconstruction
head along with segmentation, or induce it into loss function.
Following same theory, Caliva et al. [17] have used distance
maps derived from ground truth masks and created a custom
penalty based loss function. Using this approach, its easy to
guide the networks focus towards hard-to-segment boundary
regions. The loss function is deﬁned as:
L(y,p ) = 1
N
N∑
i=1
(1 +φ)(⊙)LCE (y,p ) (22)
Here, φ are generated distance maps
Note Here, constant 1 is added to avoid vanishing gradient
problem in U-Net and V-Net architectures.
Fig. 3. Hausdorff Distance between point sets X and Y [18]
M. Hausdorff Distance Loss
Hausdorff Distance (HD) is a metric used by segmentation
approaches to track the performance of a model. It is deﬁned
as:
d(X,Y ) = maxxϵXminyϵY||x−y||2 (23)

The objective of any segmentation model is to maximize the
Hausdorff Distance [19], but due to its non-convex nature,
its not widely used as loss function. Karimi et al. [18] has
proposed 3 variants of Hausdorff Distance based loss functions
which incorporates the metric use case and ensures that the
loss function is tractable. These 3 variants are designed on
basis of how we can use Hausdorff Distance as part of loss
function: (i) taking max of all HD errors, (ii) minimum of all
errors obtained by placing a circular structure of radius r, and
(iii) max of a convolutional kernel placed on top of missing
segmented pixels.
N. Correlation Maximized Structural Similarity Loss
A lot of semantic based segmentation loss functions focus
on classiﬁcation error at pixel level while disregarding the
pixel level structural information. Some other loss functions
[20] have attempted to add information using structural priors
such as CRF, GANs, etc. In this loss functions, zhao et al. [20]
have introduced a Structural Similarity Loss (SSL) to achieve
a high positive linear correlation between the ground truth
map and the predicted map. Its divided into 3 steps: Structure
Comparison, Cross-Entropy weight coefﬁcient determination,
and mini-batch loss deﬁnition.
As part of Structure comparison, authors have calculated e-
coefﬁcient, which can measure the degree of linear correlation
between ground truth and prediction:
e =|y−µy +C4
σy +C4
− p−µp +C4
σp +C4
| (24)
Here, C4 is stability factor set to 0.01 as an empirical
observed value. µy and σy are the local mean and standard
deviation of the ground truth y respectively. y locates at the
center of the local region and p is the predicted probability.
After calculating the degree of correlation, zhao et al. [20]
have used it as coefﬁcient for cross entropy loss function,
deﬁned as:
fn,c = 1∗en,c >βe max (25)
Using this coefﬁcient function, we can deﬁne SSL loss as:
Lossssl(yn,c,pn,c) = en,cfn,cLCE (yn,c,pn,c) (26)
and ﬁnally for mini-batch loss calculation, The SSL can be
deﬁned as:
Lssl = 1
M
N∑
n=1
C∑
c=1
Lssl(yn,c,pn,c) (27)
where, M is ∑N
n=1
∑C
c=1fn,c Using above formula, loss func-
tion will automatically abandon those pixel level predictions,
which doesn’t show correlation in terms of structure.
O. Log-Cosh Dice Loss
Dice Coefﬁcient is a widely used metric to evaluate the
segmentation output. It has also been modiﬁed to be used as
loss function as it fulﬁlls the mathematical representation of
segmentation objective. But due to its non-convex nature, it
might fail in achieving the optimal results. Lovsz-Softmax loss
[21] aimed to tackle the problem of non-convex loss function
by adding the smoothing using Lovsz extension. Log-Cosh
approach has been widely used in regression based problem
for smoothing the curve.
Fig. 4. Cosh(x) function is the average of ex and e−x
Fig. 5. tanh(x) function is continuous and ﬁnite. It ranges from [−1, 1]
Hyperbolic functions have been used by deep learning
community in terms of non-linearities such as tanh layer. They
are tractable as well as easily differentiable. Cosh(x) is deﬁned
as (ref 4):
coshx = ex +e−x
2 (28)
and
cosh′x = ex−e−x
2 =sinhx (29)
but, at presentcoshx range can go up to inﬁnity. So, to capture
it in range, log space is used, making the log-cosh function to
be:
L(x) = log(coshx) (30)
and using chain rule
L′(x) = sinhx
coshx =tanhx (31)
which is continuous and ﬁnite in nature, as tanhx ranges from
[−1, 1]

TABLE II
TABULAR SUMMARY OF SEMANTIC SEGMENTATION LOSS FUNCTIONS
Loss Function Use cases
Binary Cross-Entropy Works best in equal data distribution among classes scenarios
Bernoulli distribution based loss function
Weighted Cross-Entropy Widely used with skewed dataset
Weighs positive examples by β coefﬁcient
Balanced Cross-Entropy Similar to weighted-cross entropy, used widely with skewed dataset
weighs both positive as well as negative examples by β and 1 −β respectively
Focal Loss works best with highly-imbalanced dataset
down-weight the contribution of easy examples, enabling model to learn hard examples
Distance map derived loss penalty term Variant of Cross-Entropy
Used for hard-to-segment boundaries
Dice Loss Inspired from Dice Coefﬁcient, a metric to evaluate segmentation results.
As Dice Coefﬁcient is non-convex in nature, it has been modiﬁed to make it more tractable.
Sensitivity-Speciﬁcity Loss Inspired from Sensitivity and Speciﬁcity metrics
Used for cases where there is more focus on True Positives.
Tversky Loss Variant of Dice Coefﬁcient
Add weight to False positives and False negatives.
Focal Tversky Loss Variant of Tversky loss with focus on hard examples
Log-Cosh Dice Loss(ours) Variant of Dice Loss and inspired regression log-cosh approach for smoothing
Variations can be used for skewed dataset
Hausdorff Distance loss Inspired by Hausdorff Distance metric used for evaluation of segmentation
Loss tackle the non-convex nature of Distance metric by adding some variations
Shape aware loss Variation of cross-entropy loss by adding a shape based coefﬁcient
used in cases of hard-to-segment boundaries.
Combo Loss Combination of Dice Loss and Binary Cross-Entropy
used for lightly class imbalanced by leveraging beneﬁts of BCE and Dice Loss
Exponential Logarithmic Loss Combined function of Dice Loss and Binary Cross-Entropy
Focuses on less accurately predicted cases
Correlation Maximized Structural Similarity Loss Focuses on Segmentation Structure.
Used in cases of structural importance such as medical images.
Fig. 6. Sample CT scan image from NBFS Skull Stripping Dataset [1]
On basis of above proof which showcased that Log of Cosh
function will remain continuous and ﬁnite after ﬁrst order
differentiation. We are proposing Log-Cosh Dice Loss function
for its tractable nature while encapsulating the features of dice
coefﬁcient. It can deﬁned as:
Llc−dce =log(cosh(DiceLoss)) (32)
III. E XPERIMENTS
For experiments, we have implemented simple 2D U-Net
model [2] architecture for segmentation with 10 convolution
encoded layers and 8 decoded convolutional transpose layers.
We have used NBFS Skull-stripping dataset [1], which consists
TABLE III
COMPARISON OF SOME ABOVE MENTIONED LOSS FUNCTIONS ON BASIS
OF DICE SCORES , SENSITIVITY AND SPECIFICITY FOR SKULL
SEGMENTATION
Loss Evaluation Metrics
Functions Dice Coefﬁcient Sensitivity Speciﬁcity
Binary Cross-Entropy 0.968 0.976 0.998
Weighted Cross-Entropy 0.962 0.966 0.998
Focal Loss 0.936 0.952 0.999
Dice Loss 0.970 0.981 0.998
Tversky Loss 0.965 0.979 0.996
Focal Tversky Loss 0.977 0.990 0.997
Sensitivity-Speciﬁcity Loss 0.957 0.980 0.996
Exp-Logarithmic Loss 0.972 0.982 0.997
Log Cosh Dice Loss 0.989 0.975 0.997
of 125 skull CT scans, and each scan consists of 120 slices
(refer ﬁgure 6). For training, we have used batch size of 32
and adam optimizer with learning rate 0.001 and learning rate
reduction up to 10−8. As part of training, validation, and test
data, we have split data-set into 60-20-20. We have performed
experiments using only 9 loss functions as other loss functions
were either resolving into our existing chosen loss function or
weren’t ﬁt for NBFS skull dataset. After training the model for
different loss functions, we have evaluated them on basis of
well known evaluation metrics: Dice Coefﬁcient, Sensitivity,
and Speciﬁcity.

1) Evaluation Metrics: Evaluation Metrics plays an impor-
tant role in assessing the outcomes of segmentation models.
In this work, we have analyzed our results using Dice Coefﬁ-
cient, Sensitivity, and Speciﬁcity metric. Dice Coefﬁcient, also
known as overlapping index measures the overlapping between
ground truth and predicted output. Similarly, Sensitivity gives
more weightage to True Positives and Sensitivity calculates the
ratio of True Negatives. Collectively, these metrics examine the
model performance effectively.
DC = 2TP
2TP +FP +FN , (33)
Sensitivity (TPR ) = TP
TP +FN ,and (34)
Specificity (TNR ) = TN
TN +FP (35)
In Conclusion, by using 40,000 annotated segmented ex-
amples, we achieved an optimal dice coefﬁcient of 0.98
using Focal Tversky Loss. Log-Cosh Dice Loss function
also achieved similar results of the dice coefﬁcient 0.975,
very close to the best results. As of sensitivity, i.e., True
Positive Rate, Focal Tversky Loss outperformed all other loss
functions, whereas speciﬁcity(True Negative Rate) remained
consistent across all loss functions. We have also observed
similar outcomes in our past research [2] Focal Tversky loss
and Tversky loss generally gives optimal results with right
parameter values.
IV. C ONCLUSION
Loss functions play an essential role in determining the
model performance. For complex objectives such as seg-
mentation, it’s not possible to decide on a universal loss
function. The majority of the time, it depends on the data-
set properties used for training, such as distribution, skewness,
boundaries, etc. None of the mentioned loss functions have the
best performance in all the use cases. However, we can say
that highly imbalanced segmentation works better with focus
based loss functions. Similarly, binary-cross entropy works
best with balanced data-sets, whereas mildly skewed data-sets
can work around smoothed or generalized dice coefﬁcient. In
this paper, we have summarized 14 well-known loss functions
for semantic segmentation and proposed a tractable variant of
dice loss function for better and accurate optimization. In the
future, we will use this work as a baseline implementation for
few-shot segmentation [22] experiments.
REFERENCES
[1] Benjamin Puccio, James P. Pooley, John Pellman, Elise C Taverna, and
R. Cameron Craddock. The preprocessed connectomes project repository
of manually corrected skull-stripped t1-weighted anatomical mri data.
GigaScience, 5, 2016.
[2] Shruti Jadon, Owen P. Leary, Ian Pan, Tyler J. Harder, David W.
Wright, Lisa H. Merck, and Derek L. Merck. A comparative study
of 2D image segmentation algorithms for traumatic brain lesions using
CT data from the ProTECTIII multicenter clinical trial. In Po-Hao
Chen and Thomas M. Deserno, editors, Medical Imaging 2020: Imaging
Informatics for Healthcare, Research, and Applications , volume 11318,
pages 195 – 203. International Society for Optics and Photonics, SPIE,
2020.
[3] Ma Jun. Segmentation loss odyssey. arXiv preprint arXiv:2005.13449 ,
2020.
[4] Ma Yi-de, Liu Qing, and Qian Zhi-Bai. Automated image segmentation
using improved pcnn model based on cross-entropy. In Proceedings
of 2004 International Symposium on Intelligent Multimedia, Video and
Speech Processing, 2004. , pages 743–746. IEEE, 2004.
[5] Vasyl Pihur, Susmita Datta, and Somnath Datta. Weighted rank ag-
gregation of cluster validation measures: a monte carlo cross-entropy
approach. Bioinformatics, 23(13):1607–1615, 2007.
[6] Yaoshiang Ho and Samuel Wookey. The real-world-weight cross-entropy
loss function: Modeling the costs of mislabeling. IEEE Access, 8:4806–
4813, 2019.
[7] Saining Xie and Zhuowen Tu. Holistically-nested edge detection. In
Proceedings of the IEEE international conference on computer vision ,
pages 1395–1403, 2015.
[8] Shiwen Pan, Wei Zhang, Wanjun Zhang, Liang Xu, Guohua Fan,
Jianping Gong, Bo Zhang, and Haibo Gu. Diagnostic model of coronary
microvascular disease combined with full convolution deep network with
balanced cross-entropy cost function. IEEE Access, 7:177997–178006,
2019.
[9] TY Lin, P Goyal, R Girshick, K He, and P Doll ´ar. Focal loss for dense
object detection. arxiv 2017. arXiv preprint arXiv:1708.02002 , 2002.
[10] Carole H Sudre, Wenqi Li, Tom Vercauteren, Sebastien Ourselin, and
M Jorge Cardoso. Generalised dice overlap as a deep learning loss
function for highly unbalanced segmentations. In Deep learning in
medical image analysis and multimodal learning for clinical decision
support, pages 240–248. Springer, 2017.
[11] Seyed Sadegh Mohseni Salehi, Deniz Erdogmus, and Ali Gholipour.
Tversky loss function for image segmentation using 3d fully convolu-
tional deep networks. In International Workshop on Machine Learning
in Medical Imaging , pages 379–387. Springer, 2017.
[12] Nabila Abraham and Naimul Mefraz Khan. A novel focal tversky loss
function with improved attention u-net for lesion segmentation. In 2019
IEEE 16th International Symposium on Biomedical Imaging (ISBI 2019),
pages 683–687. IEEE, 2019.
[13] Seyed Raein Hashemi, Seyed Sadegh Mohseni Salehi, Deniz Erdogmus,
Sanjay P Prabhu, Simon K Warﬁeld, and Ali Gholipour. Asymmet-
ric loss functions and deep densely-connected networks for highly-
imbalanced medical image segmentation: Application to multiple scle-
rosis lesion detection. IEEE Access, 7:1721–1735, 2018.
[14] Zeeshan Hayder, Xuming He, and Mathieu Salzmann. Shape-aware
instance segmentation. arXiv preprint arXiv:1612.03129 , 2(5):7, 2016.
[15] Saeid Asgari Taghanaki, Yefeng Zheng, S Kevin Zhou, Bogdan
Georgescu, Puneet Sharma, Daguang Xu, Dorin Comaniciu, and Ghas-
san Hamarneh. Combo loss: Handling input and output imbalance
in multi-organ segmentation. Computerized Medical Imaging and
Graphics, 75:24–33, 2019.
[16] Ken CL Wong, Mehdi Moradi, Hui Tang, and Tanveer Syeda-Mahmood.
3d segmentation with exponential logarithmic loss for highly unbalanced
object sizes. In International Conference on Medical Image Computing
and Computer-Assisted Intervention , pages 612–619. Springer, 2018.
[17] Francesco Caliva, Claudia Iriondo, Alejandro Morales Martinez,
Sharmila Majumdar, and Valentina Pedoia. Distance map loss penalty
term for semantic segmentation. arXiv preprint arXiv:1908.03679, 2019.
[18] Davood Karimi and Septimiu E Salcudean. Reducing the hausdorff
distance in medical image segmentation with convolutional neural net-
works. IEEE Transactions on medical imaging , 39(2):499–513, 2019.
[19] Javier Ribera, David G ¨uera, Yuhao Chen, and Edward J. Delp. Weighted
hausdorff distance: A loss function for object localization. ArXiv,
abs/1806.07564, 2018.
[20] Shuai Zhao, Boxi Wu, Wenqing Chu, Yao Hu, and Deng Cai. Correlation
maximized structural similarity loss for semantic segmentation. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1910.08711, 2019.
[21] Maxim Berman, Amal Rannen Triki, and Matthew B. Blaschko. The
lovsz-softmax loss: A tractable surrogate for the optimization of the
intersection-over-union measure in neural networks, 2017.
[22] S. Jadon. Hands-on one-shot learning with python: A Practical Guide
to Implementing Fast and Accurate Deep Learning Models with Fewer
Training. Packt publshing Limited, 2019.
[23] Jan Hendrik Moltz, Annika H ¨ansch, Bianca Lassen-Schmidt, Benjamin
Haas, A Genghi, J Schreier, Tomasz Morgas, and Jan Klein. Learning a
loss function for segmentation: A feasibility study. In 2020 IEEE 17th
International Symposium on Biomedical Imaging (ISBI), pages 357–360.
IEEE, 2020.