A Database of Human Segmented Natural Images
and its Application to Evaluating Segmentation Algorithms
and Measuring Ecological Statistics
David Martin, Charless Fowlkes, Doron Tal, Jitendra Malik
Report No. UCB/CSD-1-1133
January 2001
Computer Science Division (EECS)
University of California
Berkeley, California 94720

Abstract
This paper presents a database containing ‘groundtruth’
segmentations produced by humans for images of a wide
variety of natural scenes. We deﬁne an error measure
which quantiﬁes the consistency between segmentations
of differing granularities and ﬁnd that different human
segmentations of the same image are highly consistent.
Use of this dataset is demonstrated in two applications:
(1) evaluating the performance of segmentation algo-
rithms and (2) measuring probability distributions asso-
ciated with Gestalt grouping factors as well as statistics
of image region properties.
1. Introduction
Two central problems in vision are image segmentation
and recognition1. Both problems are hard, and we do not
yet have any general purpose solution approaching human
level competence for either one.
While it is unreasonable to expect quick solutions to
either problem, there is one dimension on which research
in recognition is on much more solid grounds–it is con-
siderably easier to quantify the performance of computer
vision algorithms at recognition than at segmentation.
Recognition is classiﬁcation, and one can empirically esti-
mate the probability of misclassiﬁcation by simply count-
ing classiﬁcation errors on a test set. The ready avail-
ability of test sets – two of most signiﬁcant ones are the
MNIST handwritten digit dataset and the FERET face
data set–has meant that different algorithms can be com-
pared directly using the same quantitative error measures.
It is well accepted that one cannot evaluate a recognition
algorithm by showing a few images of correct classiﬁca-
tion. In contrast, image segmentation performance evalu-
ation remains subjective. Typically, researchers will show
their results on a few images and point out why the results
‘look good’. We never know from such studies whether
the results are best examples or typical examples, whether
the technique will work only on images that have no tex-
ture, and so on.
The major challenge is that the question “What is a cor-
rect segmentation” is a subtler question than “Is this digit
a 5”. This has led researchers e.g. Borra and Sarkar[3]
1It could be argued that they are aspects of the same problem. We do
not necessarily disagree!
Figure 1: Sample of 10 images from the segmentation database. Each
image has been segmented by 3 different people. A total of 10 people
are represented in this data.
1

(a) (b) (c) (d)
Figure 2: Using the segmentation tool. See

2.1 for details.
to argue that segmentation or grouping performance can
be evaluated only in the context of a task such as object
recognition. We don’t wish to deny the importance of
evaluating segmentations in the context of a task. How-
ever, the thesis of this paper is that segmentations can also
be evaluated purely as segmentations by comparing them
to those produced by multiple human observers and that
there is considerable consistency among different human
segmentations of the same image so as to make such a
comparison reliable.
Figure 1 shows some example images from the
database and 3 different segmentations for each image.
The images are of complex, natural scenes. In such im-
ages, multiple cues are available for segmentation by a
human or a computer program–low level cues such as co-
herence of brightness, texture or continuity of contour, in-
termediate level cues such as symmetry and convexity, as
well as high level cues based on recognition of familiar
objects. The instructions to the human observers made
no attempt to restrict or encourage the use of any partic-
ular type of cues. For instance, it is perfectly reasonable
for observers to use their familiarity with faces to guide
their segmentation of the image in the second row of Fig-
ure 1. We realize that this implies that a computational ap-
proach based purely on, say, low-level coherence of color
and texture, would ﬁnd it difﬁcult to attain perfect per-
formance. In our view, this is perfectly ﬁne. We wish to
deﬁne a ‘goldstandard’for segmentation results without
any prior biases on what cues and algorithms are to be
(a) (b)
(c) (d)
Figure 3: Motivation for making segmentation error measures tol-
erant to reﬁnement. (a) shows the original image. (b)-(d) show three
segmentations in our database by different subjects. (b) and (d) are both
simple reﬁnements of (c), while (b) and (d) illustrate mutual reﬁnement.
exploited to obtain those results. We expect that as seg-
mentation and perceptual organization algorithms evolve
to make richer use of multiple cues, their performance
could continue to be evaluated on the same dataset.
Note that the segmentations produced by different hu-
mans for a given image in Figure 1 are not identical. But,
are they consistent? One can think of a human’s percep-
tual organization as imposing a hierarchical tree structure
on the image. Even if two observers have exactly the same
perceptual organization of an image, they may choose to
segment at varying levels of granularity. See e.g. Figure 3.
This implies that we need to deﬁne segmentation consis-
tency measures that do not penalize such differences. We
demonstrate empirically that human segmentations for the
wide variety of images in the database are quite consistent
according to these criteria, suggesting that we have a re-
liable standard with which to evaluate different computer
algorithms for image segmentation. We exploit this fact
to develop a quantitative performance measure for image
segmentation algorithms.
There has been a limited amount of previous work eval-
uating segmentation performance using datasets with hu-
man observers providing the ground truth. Heath et al.
[8] evaluated the output of different edge detectors on a
subjective quantitative scale using the criterion of ease of
recognizability of objects (for human observers) in the
edge images. Closer to our work is the Sowerby image
2

dataset that has been used by Huang [9] and Konishi et
al. [12]. This dataset is small, not publicly available, and
contains only one segmentation for each image. In spite
of these limitations, the dataset has proved quite useful for
work such as that of Konishi et al. who used it to evalu-
ate the effectiveness of different edge ﬁlters as indicators
of boundaries. We expect that our dataset would ﬁnd far
wider use, by virtue of being considerably more varied
and extensive, and the fact that we provide a mechanism
for computing the consistency of different segmentations.
The database that we have collected is a valuable re-
source for studying statistics of natural images. Most such
studies in the past have concentrated on ﬁrst and second
order statistics such as the power spectrum or covariances,
either on pixel brightnesses directly or on wavelet coefﬁ-
cients [10, 15, 16, 11, 12, 5, 13, 18]. We can go much
further given the additional information provided by the
segmentations. For instance, we can evaluate prior distri-
butions corresponding to the various Gestalt factors such
as similarity, proximity, convexity etc. and thus provide
objective justiﬁcations for the use of these cues in group-
ing. While this way of thinking about the Gestalt factors
was suggested nearly 50 years ago by Brunswik [4], so far
empirical measurements of probability distributions have
been limited to the factor of good continuation, e.g. [2].
Another application of the database is in studying the em-
pirical distribution of sizes of regions in an image. This
turns out to follow a power law, consistent with the work
of Alvarez, Gousseau and Morel [1] with a rather different
deﬁnition of sizes.
This paper is organized as follows. In  2, we describe
in detail the construction of the database of image seg-
mentations. In  3 we deﬁne measures for evaluating con-
sistency of different segmentations of an image.  4 puts
the database to use by evaluating the performance of the
Normalized cut algorithm on the different images. Perfor-
mance is evaluated by computing the consistency of the
computer segmentations with those made by human ob-
servers and comparing that to consistency among human
observers. In  5, we ﬁnd another use for the database,
namely in evaluating the ecological statistics of various
Gestalt grouping factors. We conclude in  6.
0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 10
20
40
60
GCE measure (same images)
0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 10
200
400
600
800
1000
GCE measure (different images)
0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 10
20
40
60
LCE measure (same images)
0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 10
200
400
600
800
1000
LCE measure (different images)
Figure 4: Distributions of the GCE (left) and LCE (right) measures
over the segmentation database. The error measures are applied to all
pairs of segmentations. The upper graphs show the error for segmenta-
tions of the same image. The lower graphs show the error for segmenta-
tions of different images. The spike at zero in the different-image graphs
is due to degenerate segmentations of one particular image, of which ev-
erything else is a reﬁnement. Clockwise from the top-left, the means are
0.11, 0.07, 0.39, 0.30.
2. Image Segmentation Database
The ﬁrst task in constructing the segmentation database
was to select a set of images. We chose 1000 representa-
tive 481x321 RGB images from the Corel image database.
This database of 40,000 images is widely used in com-
puter vision (e.g. [6, 7]). The criterion for selecting im-
ages was simple: We chose images of natural scenes that
contain at least one discernible object. This criterion culls
images that are inappropriate for the task of recognition,
such as photographs of reﬂections of neon signs on wet
concrete sidewalks, or photographs of marble textures.
2.1. Segmentation Tool
In order to easily collect segmentations from a wide range
of people, we have developed a Java application that one
can use to divide an image into segments, where a seg-
ment is simply a set of pixels. This approach has several
advantages. First, anyone with Internet access can seg-
ment images. Second, the process produces an explicit
partition of the pixels into groups (segments). Third, a
server process can dynamically assign images to users,
which gives precise control over the database content as it
evolves.
Figure 2 shows a sequence of snapshots taken from a
3

GCE
 LCE
 Ideal Measure
Figure 5: Error matrix for all image pairs, for GCE (left) and LCE
(middle).   corresponds to the error between segmentations  and  ,
where black signiﬁes zero error. Segmentations are sorted by image, so
segmentations of the same image are adjacent. The spurious horizontal
and vertical bands conﬁrm that the spike in the different-image graphs
of Figure 4 are caused by degenerate segmentations of one image. The
rightmost matrix shows the block-diagonal structure of the ideal error
measure applied to a ﬂawless dataset.
0 0.5 10
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
LCE
GCE
Measure Correlation (all segmentations)
0 0.5 10
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
LCE
GCE
Measure Correlation (same images)
Figure 6: LCE vs. GCE for segmentations of different images (left)
and the same image (right). The dashed line 
	 shows that GCE is a
stricter measure than LCE.
typical session with the segmentation tool. Each snap-
shot shows two windows. The upper window is the main
window of the application. It shows the image with all
segments outlined in white. The lower window in each
snapshot is the splitter window, which is used to split an
existing segment into two new segments.
Consider Figure 2(a). The main window shows two
segments. The user has selected the larger one in order to
split it using the lower window. Between (a) and (b), the
user drew a contour around the leftmost two pups in the
top pane of the splitter window. This operation transfers
the enclosed pixels to the bottom pane, creating a new
segment. Between (c) and (d), the user split the two pups
from each other. In (d), there are 4 segments.
In addition to simply splitting segments, the user can
transfer pixels between any two existing segments. This
provides a tremendous amount of ﬂexibility in the way
in which users create and deﬁne segments. The interface
is simple, yet accommodates a wide range of segmenta-
tion styles. In less than 5 minutes, one can create a high-
quality, pixel-accurate segmentation with 10-20 segments
using a standard PC.
2.2. Experiment Setup and Protocol
It is imperative that variation among human segmenta-
tions of an image is due to different perceptual organiza-
tions of the scene, rather than aspects of the experimental
setup. In order to minimize variation due to different in-
terpretations of the task, the instructions were made inten-
tionally vague in an effort to cause the subjects to break up
the scene in a “natural” manner: Divide each image into
pieces, where each piece represents a distinguished thing
in the image. It is important that all of the pieces have
approximately equal importance. The number of things
in each image is up to you. Something between 2 and 20
should be reasonable for any of our images.
The initial subject group was a set of students in a
graduate-level computer vision class who were addition-
ally instructed to segment as naive observers. The sub-
jects were provided with several example segmentations
of simple, unambiguous images as a visual description of
the task.
Images were assigned to subjects dynamically. When
a subject requested a new image, an image was chosen
randomly with a bias towards images that had been seg-
mented by some other subject. In addition, the software
ensured that (1) no subject saw the same image twice, (2)
no image was segmented by more than 5 people, and (3)
no two images were segmented by exactly the same set of
subjects.
2.3. Database Status and Plans
The results in this paper were generated using our ﬁrst
version of the dataset that contains 150 grayscale segmen-
tations by 10 people of 50 images, with 30 images with 3
or more segmentations. The data collection is ongoing,
and at this time, we have 3000 segmentations by 25 peo-
ple of 800 images. We aim to ultimately collect at least 4
grayscale and 4 color segmentations of 1000 images.
4

Figure 7: Segmentations produced by the Normalized Cuts algorithm
using both contour and texture cues. Compare with Figure 1.
3. Segmentation Error Measures
There are two reasons to develop a measure that provides
an empirical comparison between two segmentations of
an image. First, we can use it to validate the segmenta-
tion database by showing that segmentations of the same
image by different people are consistent. Second, we can
use the measure to evaluate segmentation algorithms in an
objective manner.
A potential problem for a measure of consistency be-
tween segmentations is that there is no unique segmenta-
tion of an image. For example, two people may segment
an image differently because either (1) they perceive the
scene differently, or (2) they segment at different granu-
larities. If two different segmentations arise from differ-
ent perceptual organizations of the scene, then it is fair to
declare the segmentations inconsistent. If, however, one
segmentation is simply a reﬁnement of the other, then the
error should be small, or even zero. Figure 3 shows ex-
amples of both simple and mutual reﬁnement from our
database. We do not penalize simple reﬁnement in our
measures, since it does not preclude identical perceptual
organizations of the scene.
In addition to being tolerant to reﬁnement, any error
measure should also be (1) independent of the coarseness
of pixelation, (2) robust to noise along region boundaries,
and (3) tolerant of different segment counts between the
two segmentations. The third point is due to the complex-
ity of the images: We need to be able to compare two
0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 10
20
40
60
GCE measure (same images)
0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 10
200
400
600
800
1000
GCE measure (different images)
0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 10
20
40
60
LCE measure (same images)
0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 10
200
400
600
800
1000
LCE measure (different images)
Figure 8: Distributions of the GCE (left) and LCE (right) measures
for NCuts segmentations vs. human segmentations. The error measures
were applied to pairs of segmentations, where each pair contains one
NCuts and one human segmentations (see

4 for details). The upper
graphs show the error for segmentations of the same image. For ref-
erence, the lower graphs show the error for segmentations of different
images. Clockwise from the top-left, the means are 0.28, 0.22, 0.38,
0.31. Compare with Figure 4.
segmentations when they have different numbers of seg-
ments. In the remainder of this section, we present two
error measures that meet all of the aforementioned crite-
ria. We then apply the measures to the database of human
segmentations.
3.1. Error Measure Deﬁnitions
A segmentation is simply a division of the pixels of an
image into sets. A segmentation error measure takes two
segmentations  and  as input, and produces a real-
valued output in the range  	
 where zero signiﬁes no
error.
We deﬁne a measure of error at each pixel that is tol-
erant to reﬁnement as the basis of both measures. For a
given pixel  consider the segments in  and  that
contain that pixel. The segments are sets of pixels. If
one segment is a proper subset of the other, then the pixel
lies in an area of reﬁnement, and the local error should
be zero. If there is no subset relationship, then the two
regions overlap in an inconsistent manner. In this case,
the local error should be non-zero. Let  denote set differ-
ence, and   the cardinality of set  . If 
 is the set
of pixels corresponding to the region in segmentation 
that contains pixel 
 , the local reﬁnement error is deﬁned
as:
5

1 3 5 7 9 11 13 15 17 19 21 23 25 27 290
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
Error
Image Number
Figure 9: The GCE for human vs. human (gray) and NCuts vs.
human (white) for each image for which we have  3 human segmenta-
tions. The LCE data is similar.



 

 
 
    

    


     


(1)
Note that this local error measure is not symmetric. It
encodes a measure of reﬁnement in one direction only:

      

is zero precisely when  is a reﬁnement of
 at pixel  , but not vice versa. Given this local reﬁne-
ment error in each direction at each pixel, there are two
natural ways to combine the values into a error measure
for the entire image. Global Consistency Error (GCE)
forces all local reﬁnements to be in the same direction.
Local Consistency Error (LCE) allows reﬁnement in dif-
ferent directions in different parts of the image. Let  be
the number of pixels:


    




	



      





    

(2)



   






	

     



     

(3)
As





for any two segmentations, it is
clear that GCE is a tougher measure than LCE. Looking
at Figure 3, GCE would tolerate the simple reﬁnement
from (c) to (b) or (d), while LCE would also tolerate the
mutual reﬁnement of (b) and (d). Note that since both
measures are tolerant of reﬁnement, they are meaningful
only when comparing two segmentations with an approx-
imately equal number of segments. This is because there
are two trivial segmentations that achieve zero error: One
pixel per segment, and one segment for the entire image.
The former is a reﬁnement of any segmentation, and any
segmentation is a reﬁnement of the latter.
3.2. Error Measure Validation
We apply the GCE and LCE measures to all pairs of seg-
mentations in our dataset with two goals. First, we hope to
show that given the arguably ambiguous task of segment-
ing an image into an unspeciﬁed number of segments, dif-
ferent people produce consistent results on each image.
Second, we hope to validate the measures by showing that
the error between segmentations of the same image is low,
while the error between segmentations of different images
is high.
Figure 4 shows the distribution of error between pairs
of human segmentations. The top graphs show the er-
ror between segmentations of the same image; the bottom
graphs show the error between segmentations of different
images. As expected, the error distribution for segmenta-
tions of the same image shows a strong spike near zero,
while the error distribution for segmentations of different
images is neither localized nor close to zero.
We characterize the separation of the two distributions
by noting that for LCE, 5.9% of segmentation pairs lie
above 0.12 for the same image or below 0.12 for different
images. For GCE, 5.9% of pairs lie above 0.16 for the
same image or below 0.16 for different images. Note the
good behavior of both measures despite the fact that the
number of segments in each segmentation of a particular
image can vary by a factor of 10. Figure 5 shows the raw
data used to the compute the histograms.
In Figure 6, we plot LCE vs. GCE for each pair of
segmentations. As expected, we see (1) that GCE and
LCE are measuring similar qualities, and (2) that GCE 
LCE in all cases.
6

4. A Segmentation Benchmark
In this section, we use the segmentation database and er-
ror measures to evaluate the Normalized Cuts (NCuts) im-
age segmentation algorithm.
In collecting our dataset, we permitted a great deal of
ﬂexibility in how many segments each subject created for
an image. This is desirable from the point of view of cre-
ating an information-rich dataset. However, when com-
paring a human segmentation to a computer segmentation,
our measures are most meaningful when the number of
segments is approximately equal. For example, an algo-
rithm could thwart the benchmark by producing one seg-
ment for the whole image, or one segment for each pixel.
Due to the tolerance of GCE and LCE to reﬁnement, both
of these degenerate segmentations have zero error.
Since image segmentation is an ill-posed problem with-
out stating the desired granularity, we can expect any seg-
mentation algorithm to provide some sort of control over
the number of segments it produces. If our human seg-
mentations of an image contain 4, 9, and 13 segments,
then we instruct the computer algorithm to also produce
segmentations with 4, 9, and 13 segments. We then com-
pare each computer segmentation to each human segmen-
tation. In this way, we can make a meaningful compari-
son to the human segmentation error shown in Figure 4.
In addition, we consider the mean error over all images
as a summary statistic that can be used to rank different
segmentation algorithms.
The NCuts algorithm [17, 14] takes a graph theoretic
approach to the problem of image segmentation. An im-
age is treated as a weighted graph. Each pixel corresponds
to a node, and edge weights computed from both con-
tour and texture cues denote a local measure of similarity
between two pixels. NCuts segments an image by cut-
ting this graph into strongly connected parts. The ver-
sion of NCuts described in [14] automatically determines
the number of regions by splitting the graph until the cuts
surpass a threshold. We modiﬁed the stopping criterion
to provide explicit control over the ﬁnal number of seg-
ments.
Figure 8 shows the error between NCuts segmentations
and human segmentations. In comparing this NCuts error
to the human error shown in Figure 4, we see that NCuts
is producing segmentations worse than humans, but still
better than “random.” The error distributions for segmen-
0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 10
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
P(samesegment|distance)
distance (normalized)
probability of same segment
Figure 10: Proximity: The probability that two points belong to
the same segment given their distance. Distances have been scaled per
image as discussed in the text and normalized to range from 0 to 1. We
sample 1000 points from each segmentation and compute all pairwise
distances. Error bars show  intervals.
tations of different images (the bottom graphs in each ﬁg-
ure) approximate the performance of random segmenta-
tion. The mean error over all segmentation pairs gives
NCuts an overall error of 22% by LCE (compared to 7%
for humans), and 28% by GCE (compared to 11% for hu-
mans).
Figure 9 shows both the human error (blue) and NCuts
error (red) for each image separately. In most cases, the
human segmentations form a tight distribution near zero.
In virtually all cases, NCuts performs worse than humans,
but it fares better on some images than others. This data
can be used to ﬁnd the type of images for which an algo-
rithm has the most difﬁculty.
5. Bayesian Interpretation of Gestalt
Grouping Factors
Brunswik [4] suggested that the various Gestalt factors
of grouping such as proximity, similarity, convexity, etc.
made sense because they reﬂected the statistics of natural
scenes. For instance, if nearby pixels are more likely to
belong to the same region, it is justiﬁed to group them.
In computer vision, we would similarly like grouping al-
gorithms to be based on these ecological statistics. The
Bayesian framework provides a rigorous approach to ex-
ploiting this knowledge in the form of prior probability
distributions. Our database enables the empirical mea-
surement of these distributions.
7

0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 1
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
P(samesegment|intensitydif)
intensity differnece (normalized)
probability of same segment
Figure 11: Similarity: The probability that two points belong to
the same segment given their absolute difference in intensity (256 gray
levels). We sample 1000 points from each segmentation and compute all
pairwise similarities. Error bars show  intervals.
In this section, we present our measurements of the
probability distributions associated with the Gestalt cues
of proximity, similarity of intensity, and convexity of re-
gions. As another interesting empirical ﬁnding, we deter-
mine the frequency distribution of region areas and show
that it follows a power law.
5.1. Proximity Cues
Experiments have long shown that proximity is an im-
portant low-level cue in deciding how stimuli will be
grouped. We characterize this cue by estimating the prob-
ability that two points in an image will lie in the same re-
gion given their distance on the image plane. The results
are summarized in the form of a histogram where each
bin counts the proportion of point-pairs in a given dis-
tance range that lie within the same segment as designated
by the human segmentor. We would like our estimate to
be invariant to the granularity at which a particular image
has been segmented. To this end, we scale all distances
by

number of segments
image area .
Results are show in Figure 10. As might be expected
the probability of belonging to the same group is one
when the distance is zero and decreases monotonically
with increasing distance.
5.2. Similarity Cues
Using a similar methodology to  5.1, we examine the
probability that two points lie in the same region given
their similarity. We evaluate point-wise similarity based
on the absolute difference in pixel intensity (256 gray lev-
els). This could be clearly be extended to make use of
color or local texture. The results are shown in Figure 11.
If images of objects were uniform in intensity over the
extent of the object with some additive noise and each
object in a given scene had a unique intensity, we would
expect to see a curve that started at 1 and quickly decayed
to 0. However, images of natural objects feature varia-
tion in intensity due to texture, shading, and lighting so
the histogram we compute starts at 0.6 and monotonically
decays to 0.2. This suggests that although similarity in
intensity isn’t a perfect cue, it does capture some useful
information about group membership.
5.3. Region Convexity
One commonly posited mid-level grouping cue is the con-
vexity of foreground object boundaries. We capture the
notion of convexity for discrete, pixel-based regions by
measuring the ratio of a region’s area to the area of its
convex hull. This yields a number between zero and one
where one indicates a perfectly convex region. Since the
regions in our dataset have no labels that designate them
as foreground or background we are forced to look at the
distribution of the convexity of all image regions. This
on its own is arguably instructive and we imagine that
since there can be many foreground groups and only a
few background groups in a given image, the distribution
for only foreground regions would look very similar. Fig-
ure 12 shows our results. As expected, grouped pixels
commonly form a convex region.
5.4. Region Area
The authors of [1] approach the problem of estimating the
distribution of object sizes in natural imagery by automat-
ically ﬁnding connected components of bilevel sets and
ﬁtting the distribution of their areas. Our results from
 5.2 suggest that intensity bilevel sets are only a rough
approximation to perceptual segments in the image. Fig-
ure 13 shows the distribution of region areas in our data
set. We get an excellent ﬁt from a power law curve of the
form 


yielding an 


   	 .
8

0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 1
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
frequency of convexity measure
convexity
number of occurances
Figure 12: Convexity: The distribution of the convexity of segments.
Convexity is measured as ratio of a region’s area to the area of its convex
hull yielding a number between 0 and 1. Error bars show  intervals.
6. Summary and Conclusion
In this paper, we presented a database of natural images
segmented by human subjects along with two applications
of the dataset. First, we developed an image segmentation
benchmark by which one can objectively evaluate seg-
mentation algorithms. Second, we measured ecological
statistics related to Gestalt grouping factors. In time, we
expect the database to grow to cover 1000 images, with
4 human segmentations of each image in both grayscale
and color. This data is to be made available to the commu-
nity in the hope that we can place the problem of image
segmentation on ﬁrm, quantitative ground.
Acknowledgments
We would like to thank Dave Patterson for his valuable
input, particularly in the data collection and benchmark
portions of this paper. We also graciously thank the Fall
2000 students of UCB CS294, who provided our image
segmentations. This work was supported in part by the
UC Berkeley MICRO Fellowship (to CF), the NIH Train-
ing Grant in Vision Science T32EY 07043-22 (to DT),
ARO contract DAAH04-96-1-0341, the Digital Library
grant IRI-9411334, Defense Advanced Research Projects
Agency of the Department of Defense contract DABT63-
96-C-0056, the National Science Foundation infrastruc-
ture grant EIA-9802069, and by a grant from Intel Cor-
poration. The information presented here does not neces-
10
3
10
4
10
510
−3
10
−2
10
−1
10
0
region area
number of occurances
frequency of region area
Figure 13: Region Area: This log-log graph shows the distribution in
region areas. We ﬁt a curve of the form 	 


yielding an   	 .
For the purposes of ﬁtting, we throw out those sparsely populated bins
which contain regions that are greater than 25% of the total image area.
sarily reﬂect the position or the policy of the Government
and no ofﬁcial endorsement should be inferred.
References
[1] L. Alvarez, Y. Gousseau, and J. Morel. Scales in natu-
ral images and a consequence on their bounded variation
norm. In Scale-Space Theories in Computer Vision, 1999.
[2] J. August and S. Zucker. The curve indicator random ﬁeld:
Curve organization via edge correlation. In K. L. Boyer
and S. Sarkar, editors, Perceptual Organization in Artiﬁ-
cial Vision Systems, pages 265–287. Kluwer, 2000.
[3] S. Borra and S. Sarkar. A framework for performance
characterization of intermediate-level grouping modules.
PAMI, 19(11):1306–1312, Nov. 1997.
[4] E. Brunswik and J. Kamiya. Ecological validity of prox-
imity and other gestalt factors. Am. J. of Psych., pages
20–32, 1953.
[5] R. W. Buccigrossi and E. P. Simoncelli. Image compres-
sion via joint statistical characterization in the wavelet do-
main. IEEE Trans. on Image Proc., 8(12):1688–1701,
Dec. 1999.
[6] C. Carson, M. Thomas, S. Belongie, J. M. Hellerstein, and
J. Malik. Blobworld: A system for region-based image
indexing and retrieval. Third International Conference on
Visual Information Systems, Jun. 1999.
[7] O. Chapelle, P. Haffner, and V. N. Vapnik. Support vector
machines for histogram-based image classiﬁcation. IEEE
Trans. on Neural Networks, 10(5):1055–1064, Sep. 1999.
9

[8] M. D. Heath, S. Sarkar, T. Sanocki, and K. W. Bowyer.
A robust visual method for assessing the relative perfor-
mance of edge-detection algorithms. PAMI, 19(12):1338–
1359, 1997.
[9] J. Huang. Statistics of Natural Images and Models. PhD
thesis, Brown University, May 2000.
[10] J. Huang, A. B. Lee, and D. Mumford. Statistics of range
images. CVPR, pages 324–331, 2000.
[11] J. Huang and D. Mumford. Statistics of natural images
and models. CVPR, pages 541–547, 1999.
[12] S. Konishi, A. L. Yuille, J. Coughlan, and S. C. Zhu. Fun-
damental bounds on edge detection: an information theo-
retic evaluation of different edge cues. CVPR, pages 573–
579, 1999.
[13] A. B. Lee and D. Mumford. Scale-invariant random-
collage model for natural images. In Proc. IEEE Work-
shop on Statistical and Computational Theories of Vision.
1999.
[14] J. Malik, S. Belongie, T. Leung, and J. Shi. Contour
and image analysis for segmentation. In K. L. Boyer and
S. Sarkar, editors, Perceptual Organization for Artiﬁcial
Vision Systems, pages 139–172. Kluwer, 2000.
[15] D. L. Ruderman. The statistics of natural images. Net-
work, 5(4):517–548, 1994.
[16] D. L. Ruderman. Origins of scaling in natural images.
Vision Research, 37:3385–3395, 1997.
[17] J. Shi and J. Malik. Normalized cuts and image segmen-
tation. PAMI, 22(8):888–905, Aug. 2000.
[18] J. H. van Hateren and A. V. der Schaaf. Independent
component ﬁlters of natural images compared with sim-
ple cells in primary visual cortex. Proc. R. Soc. Lond.,
265:359–366, 1998.
10